=== page 1 ===
u1 Adopted 2022
=== page 2 ===
u2 Social Studies Standards Review and Revision Committee Chairpersons Sarah Hurd Social Studies Coordinator Jefferson County Schools Jenny Pettit Social Studies Coordinator St. Vrain Valley School District
u3 (x=72) Members Stacy Aldridge Elementary School Principal Cheyenne Mountain 12 Angela Anderson High School Teacher Jefferson County Schools Charlee Archuleta 5th Grade Teacher Colorado Springs 11 Rebecca Bates High School Teacher Fountain-Fort Carson 8 Sierra Bitsie 4th Grade Teacher Poudre R-1 Ana Brown High School Teacher Adams-Arapahoe 28J Karen Chaney High School Teacher Moffat County RE-1 Will Daniel High School Teacher Littleton 6
u4 (x=324) Michelle Dillard 5th Grade Teacher Littleton 6 Prince Dykes President Global Children Financial Literacy Foundation Jarrod Hanson Senior Instructor and Site Professor Denver Public Schools Christy Howard 1st Grade Teacher Colorado Springs 11 Erika James High School Teacher Englewood 1 Kelsey Jones Assistant Principal Cherry Creek School District Kelly Jones-Wagy High School Teacher Cherry Creek School District Charles Kastens 5th Grade Teacher Cherry Creek School District
u5 The content of these standards was adopted by the Colorado State Board of Education in November 2022. This document was created in January 2023.
=== page 3 ===
u6 (x=72) Steven Kidd 7th Grade Teacher Cherry Creek School District Ryanne Kleingarn Social Studies Coordinator Adams 12 Alma McKinley Parent Cherry Creek School District Cassie Moore Social Studies Coordinator Adams 12 Suzanne Neufeld 7th Grade Teacher Littleton 6 Maria Novilla Middle School Teacher Douglas County School District Michelle Pearson 8th Grade Teacher Adams 12 Leigh Quintana Early Childhood Education Coordinator Douglas County School District
u7 (x=324) Jean Ridl High School Teacher Fort Morgan RE-3 Sabra Sowell-Lovejoy Small Business Owner Campo K-12 Nathan Thompson 6th Grade Teacher Harrison 2 Scott Van Tatenhove High School Teacher Poudre R-1 Sam Westerdale High School Teacher Adams-Arapahoe 28J Megan Westfall Mild-Moderate Special Education Teacher Denver Public Schools Hilary Wimmer High School Teacher Adams 12
u8 The content of these standards was adopted by the Colorado State Board of Education in November 2022. This document was created in January 2023.
=== page 4 ===
u9 (x=72) State Board of Education and Colorado Department of Education Colorado State Board of Education Angelika Schroeder (D, Chair) 2nd Congressional District Boulder Steve Durham (R, Vice Chair) 5th Congressional District Colorado Springs Lisa Escárcega (D) 1st Congressional District Denver Karla Esser (D) 7th Congressional District Lakewood Rebecca McClellan (D) 6th Congressional District Centennial Joyce Rankin (R) 3rd Congressional District Carbondale Debora Scheffel (R) 4th Congressional District Parker Colorado Department of Education Katy Anthes, Ph.D. Commissioner of Education Secretary to the Board of Education Floyd Cobb, Ph.D. Associate Commissioner of Education Student Learning Division Joanna Bruno, Ph.D. Executive Director Teaching and Learning Unit
u10 (x=324) CDE Standards and Instructional Support Office Samantha Messier, Ph.D. Director Carla Aguilar, Ph.D. Music Content Specialist Robert Beauchamp Expanded Learning Opportunities Program Manager Spencer Ellis High-Impact Tutoring Program Manager Maya M. Garcia Science Content Specialist Olivia Gillespie Reading, Writing, and Communicating Content Specialist Donna Goodwin, Ph.D. Visual Arts Content Specialist Stephanie Hartman, Ph.D. Social Studies Content Specialist Judi Hofmeister Dance Content Specialist Drama and Theatre Arts Content Specialist Jamie Hurley, Ph.D. Comprehensive Health Content Specialist Physical Education Content Specialist Raymond Johnson, Ph.D. Mathematics Content Specialist Chris Summers Computer Science Content Specialist
u11 Note: The above listing reflects the people and roles in November 2022 when these standards were adopted.
u12 (x=72) Colorado Academic Standards
=== page 5 ===
u14 Purpose of Social Studies Thomas Jefferson and other founders of the republic emphasized that the vitality of a democracy depends upon the education and participation of its citizens. The need for an informed citizenry was the very impetus for the creation of free public education in the United States. If the nation is to develop fully the readiness of its citizenry to carry forward its democratic traditions, it must support progress toward attainment of the vision of powerful social studies teaching and learning (NCSS Position Statement, Social Education 80(3), pp 180–182 ©2016 National Council for the Social Studies). Our contemporary social studies education is comprised of four disciplines: history, geography, economics, and civics. Taken together, these disciplines are essential to understanding the complexity of the world. They provide the context and understanding of the human experience. They offer the crucial knowledge needed to create a framework for understanding the systems of society. The social studies provide cornerstone skills that are vital to opening doors for a more diverse, competitive workforce, and responsible citizenry. Those skills are critical thinking, self-assessment, reasoning, problem-solving, collaboration, research, and investigation to make connections in new and innovative ways as students progress through social studies education. The knowledge and skills provided through social studies are instrumental to preparing citizens to participate in our democratic society, to understanding the complexity of the world, and to comprehend the interdependencies that influence the present and shape the future. Colorado's social studies standards lay out a blueprint of the essential disciplines necessary to fulfill Jefferson’s vision. The authors of this document are educators in preschool through twelfth grade, higher education professors, and community members. The group reviewed and made revisions to the original set of social studies standards, based on input from multiple resources. Rigorous and relevant social studies include strategies and activities that engage students with essential questions and significant ideas as they encourage students to connect their learning to their prior knowledge and to current issues; to think critically and creatively about what they are learning, and to apply that learning to authentic situations. In addition, authentic social studies must be meaningful, integrative, value-based, challenging and active (Adapted from NCSS Position Statement, Social Education 80(3), pp 180–182 ©2016 National Council for the Social Studies). Created by Coloradans for Colorado students, the Colorado Academic Standards provide a grade-by- grade road map to help ensure students are successful in college, careers, and life. Standards are different from curricula. Standards are broad learning goals articulating what students should know, understand and be able to do at a given time. A curriculum is an organized plan of instruction, comprised of a sequence of instructional units, that engages students in mastering the standards. The Colorado Academic Standards aim to improve what students learn and how they learn in 12 content areas while emphasizing critical thinking, creativity, problem-solving, collaboration and communication as essential skills for life in the 21st century. The social studies standards were revised and then approved by the State Board of Education in November 2022, and districts will be expected to implement them by the fall of 2024. The social studies standards are organized into five separate disciplines: history, geography, economics, civics, and personal financial literacy.
u15 (x=72) Colorado Academic Standards
=== page 6 ===
u17 Prepared Graduates in Social Studies 1. Apply the process of inquiry to examine and analyze how historical knowledge is viewed, constructed, and interpreted. 2. Analyze historical time periods and patterns of continuity and change, through multiple perspectives, within and among cultures and societies. 3. Apply geographic representations and perspectives to analyze human movement, spatial patterns, systems, and the connections and relationships among them. 4. Examine the characteristics of places and regions, and the changing nature among geographic and human interactions. 5. Evaluate how scarce resources are allocated in societies through the analysis of individual choice, market interaction, and public policy. 6. Express an understanding of how civic participation affects policy by applying the rights and responsibilities of a citizen. 7. Analyze the origins, structures, and functions of governments to evaluate the impact on citizens and the global society. 8. Apply economic reasoning skills to make informed personal financial decisions.
u18 (x=72) Colorado Academic Standards
=== page 7 ===
u20 Standards in Social Studies The Colorado Academic Standards in social studies are organized by content area. The five standards of social studies are: 1. History History prepares students to develop critical thinking skills in an effort to explain the human experience through events of the past. History develops an understanding of perspectives, defines identity and creates insight into how social, political, and economic factors can change, while building inquiry, judgment and decision-making skills. History enhances the ability to read varied sources and develop the skills necessary to analyze, interpret, evaluate, and communicate. 2. Geography The study of geography creates an informed person with an understanding of spatial perspective and technologies for spatial analysis; and an awareness of the interdependence of the world regions and resources, and how places are connected at the local, national, and global scales. Students understand the complexity and interrelatedness of people, places, and environments. Geography helps students appreciate the dynamic relationships and complexity of the world. 3. Economics Economics teaches how people allocate scarce resources for production, distribution, and consumption, both individually and collectively; how people make decisions, how people interact in the domestic and international markets, and how forces and trends affect the economy as a whole. The two branches of economics are microeconomics and macroeconomics. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and the Consumer Price Index (CPI) are widely used economic indicators. 4. Civics Civics teaches students the complexity of the origins, structure, and functions of governments; the rights, roles, and responsibilities of citizenship; the importance of law; and the skills necessary to participate in all levels of government. Civics is a foundational component of the educational experience and critical to the continued success of our society. A democratic and free society relies on the skills, knowledge, engagement and virtue of its citizens. 5. Personal Financial Literacy Personal financial literacy applies the economic way of thinking to help individuals understand how to manage their own scarce resources using a logical decision-making process of prioritization based on analysis of the costs and benefits of every choice. Personal financial literacy teaches students an understanding of concepts like saving, investing, and debt that leads to an overall sense of financial well- being. Skills such as budgeting, paying for college, setting short- and long-term financial goals, and money management are integral to the financial health of all students.
u21 (x=72) Colorado Academic Standards
=== page 8 ===
u23 The Revision Process In revising the standards, the Colorado Department of Education began with the solicitation of public input on the revision process and engaged external experts to provide analyses of current standards in relation to national and international models. A committee of Colorado educators was selected from a pool of applicants to be part of the social studies review and revision committee. In addition to responding to public feedback on the 2018 version of the Colorado Academic Standards for social studies, the social studies standards review and revision committee was required to implement and respond to new legislative requirements for the standards. • House Bill 19-1192: History, Culture, and Civil Government in Education Commission recommendations. This bill requires that the recommendations from this commission be considered during the standards review process. • House Bill 20-1336: Holocaust and Genocide Studies. This bill required the State Board to adopt standards for Holocaust and genocide by July 2021. • House Bill 21-1200: Revise Financial Literacy Standards. This bill required the inclusion of new topics in the personal financial literacy standards. • House Bill 21-1103: Media Literacy Standards. This bill required the review process to consider the recommendations of the Media Literacy Advisory Committee established under House Bill 19-1110. • Senate Bill 21-067: Strengthening Civics Education. This bill required the inclusion of specific topics in the civics standards. A Note About LGBTQ References The purpose of House Bill 19-1192 was to ensure that the history, culture and social contributions of minority groups, including African Americans, Latinos, Indigenous peoples, Asian Americans, Hawaiian/Pacific Islanders, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals were recognized in Colorado's history and civics standards. The requirement to teach about the history, culture and social contributions of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals is not an obligation to teach comprehensive human sexuality education which is optional under state law (C.R.S. 22-1-128). The inclusion of diverse narratives in history and civics is intended to provide a broad understanding about the stories of all groups and individuals who have contributed to the development and enduring legacies of the United States. Furthermore, it is important that all children in classrooms across Colorado feel respected, included, and are treated with dignity. The social studies standards are premised on this common value.
u24 (x=72) Colorado Academic Standards
=== page 9 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections]
u26 How to Read the Colorado Academic Standards
u27 CONTENT AREA Grade Level, Standard Category
u28 Prepared Graduates: The PG Statements represent concepts and skills that all students who complete the Colorado education system must master to ensure their success in postsecondary and workforce settings.
u29 Grade Level Expectation: The GLEs are an articulation of the concepts and skills for a grade, grade band, or range that students must master to ensure their progress toward becoming a prepared graduate.
u32 (x=108) The EOs describe the evidence that demonstrates that a student is meeting the GLE at a mastery level.
u33 (x=313) The ACCs provide context for interpreting, connecting, and applying the content and skills of the GLE. This includes the Colorado Essential Skills, which are the critical skills needed to prepare students to successfully enter the workforce or educational opportunities beyond high school embedded within statute (C.R.S. 22- 7-1005) and identified by the Colorado Workforce Development Committee.
u34 The ACCs contain information unique to each content area. Content-specific elements of the ACCs are described below.
u35 (x=108) GLE Code Grade Level, Standard Category
u36 (x=292) Colorado Academic Standards (Adoption Year)
u37 (x=454) Page
u38 Academic Context and Connections in Social Studies
u39 Colorado Essential Skills: These statements describe how the learning of the content and skills
u40 described by the GLE and Eos connects to and supports the development of the Colorado Essential Skills named in the parentheses. Inquiry Questions: The sample questions that are intended to promote deeper thinking, reflection and
u41 refined understandings precisely related to the grade level expectation. Nature and Skills of History/Geography/Economics/Civics/Personal Financial Literacy: The
u42 characteristics and viewpoint one keeps as a result of mastering the grade level expectation. Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: The disciplinary, information, and media literacy skills
u43 necessary to demonstrate mastery of the evidence outcomes.
u44 (x=72) Colorado Academic Standards
=== page 10 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.1]
u46 SOCIAL STUDIES Preschool, Standard 1. History
u47 Prepared Graduates: 1. Apply the process of inquiry to examine and analyze how historical knowledge is viewed, constructed, and interpreted.
u48 Preschool Learning and Development Expectation: 1. Recognize change and sequence over time.
u49 Indicators of Progress
u50 By the end of the preschool experience (approximately 60 months/5 years old), students may: a. Begin to understand concepts of the past, present, and future. b. Begin to recall family traditions or personal events that happened in the past (this can include immediate past events from that day or week, or longer) and the
u51 present, especially as it pertains to diverse backgrounds, such as race, and individual family traditions. c. Begin to understand that previous, current, and future events can have an impact on our daily, weekly, or monthly lives.
u52 Examples of High-Quality Teaching and Learning Experiences
u53 Supportive Teaching Practices/Adults May: 1. Ask preschoolers to recall events from earlier in the day or from the day before. 2. Provide scaffolding to assist preschoolers to recall prior learning and events from classroom, school, home, and community events. 3. Ask children to identify future plans for center time, bedtime, playdates, etc. 4. Post a visual classroom schedule at eye level. 5. Post a photo-based visual timeline of how preschoolers and their classroom and families change over time. For example: updating the classroom All About Me book. 6. Use and model time-based directions. For example: First, then, beginning/middle/end. 7. Use, model, and tell time-based personal stories and have preschoolers share stories.
u54 Examples of Learning/Children May: 1. Tell stories of past events. 2. Describe how they have grown. 3. Participate in creating a memory book to identify similarities and change over time. 4. Discuss possible past, present, and future changes affecting families such as a new sibling, moving, marriage, adoption, etc. 5. Use a visual classroom schedule, such as the Schedule Helper, to anticipate a change in schedule. 6. Select examples from pictures that illustrate beginning, middle, and end from a familiar story or past, present, and future relevant to their lives, such as their own family, classroom, etc.
u55 (x=108) Preschool, Standard 1. History
u58 (x=54) SS.P.1.1
=== page 11 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.2]
u59 SOCIAL STUDIES Preschool, Standard 2. Geography
u60 Prepared Graduates: 3. Apply geographic representations and perspectives to analyze human movement, spatial patterns, systems, and the connections and relationships among them.
u61 Preschool Learning and Development Expectation: 1. Develop spatial understanding, perspectives, and connections to the world
u62 Indicators of Progress
u63 By the end of the preschool experience (approximately 60 months/5 years old), students may: a. Identify aspects of their immediate environment, such as areas of their preschool classroom, their own room or house, and/or building and roads, trees, gardens,
u64 bodies of water, and land formations. b. Develop an awareness of their own home, classroom, school, neighborhood, and community. c. Develop an awareness of basic, developmentally appropriate spatial concepts such as near and far.
u65 Examples of High-Quality Teaching and Learning Experiences
u66 Supportive Teaching Practices/Adults May: 1. Actively involve preschoolers in exploring their classroom, family, and community. For example: Exploration of the school, neighborhood, and community. 2. Furnish learning centers with literature, activities, and materials for play, based on preschoolers’ experiences with their community. For example: Visit the school office and then create a classroom office. 3. Involve preschoolers in discussions about the homes they live in and the different types of homes and buildings in the community. 4. Have preschoolers use simple maps of the classroom, playground, and neighborhood. 5. Provide materials, literature, and activities that explore different types of homes and aspects of the preschooler’s surrounding environment. For example: Apartments, single-family homes, motels, modular homes, trees, rivers, mountains, and buildings. 6. Display pictures of familiar community buildings and landmarks in block, writing, or other centers. 7. Model and provide opportunities for preschoolers to discuss a time when they have moved or someone they know has moved.
u67 Examples of Learning/Children May: 1. Draw, paint or build with blocks and other materials various environments including their homes and communities. 2. Take pictures of familiar building locations to place on a map of the school or classroom and then glue the pictures on the map while the adult labels the location. 3. Identify and discuss the things they see, such as trees, fountains, streets, etc. 4. Interact and construct with miniatures or representations of environmental objects and elements, such as making a road, mountain, and/or bridge, etc. 5. Make connections about what they are wearing based on the weather or seasons.
u68 (x=108) Preschool, Standard 2. Geography
u71 (x=54) SS.P.2.1
=== page 12 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.3]
u72 SOCIAL STUDIES Preschool, Standard 3. Economics
u73 Prepared Graduates: 5. Evaluate how scarce resources are allocated in societies through the analysis of individual choice, market interaction, and public policy.
u74 Preschool Learning and Development Expectation: 1. Understand that individuals have many wants and must make choices.
u75 Indicators of Progress
u76 By the end of the preschool experience (approximately 60 months/5 years old), students may: a. Identify choices that individuals can make to get their needs and wants met. b. Explain how individuals earn money and use it to make choices among their various wants.
u77 Examples of High-Quality Teaching and Learning Experiences
u78 Supportive Teaching Practices/Adults May: 1. Provide opportunities for preschoolers to participate in classroom jobs. 2. Create situations in which preschoolers exchange money in a play situation. 3. Create opportunities for a variety of community helpers to visit the classroom. 4. Help preschoolers begin to understand that people can work and volunteer to have their needs and wants met.
u79 Examples of Learning/Children May: 1. Engage in dramatic play, playing various job roles, and pretending to perform the work associated with the chosen job. 2. Use pretend money while engaging in dramatic play activities. 3. Pretend to have jobs and be paid for their work. 4. Exchange money, materials, or a service for goods through play.
u80 (x=108) Preschool, Standard 3. Economics
u83 (x=54) SS.P.3.1
=== page 13 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.4]
u84 SOCIAL STUDIES Preschool, Standard 4. Civics
u85 Prepared Graduates: 6. Express an understanding of how civic participation affects policy by applying the rights and responsibilities of a citizen.
u86 Preschool Learning and Development Expectation: 1. Understand one’s relationship to the family and community and respect differences in others.
u87 (x=54) Indicators of Progress
u88 (x=414) 4. Encourage children to appreciate individual differences by providing diverse materials, literature, and activities. For example: Mirrors and various art supplies, etc. 5. Provide opportunities for children to engage in community building, through large-group discussions with problem solving, and cooperative activities such as murals and pair-painting. 6. Develop individualized, nurturing, and responsive relationships with preschoolers. 7. Teach basic emotions directly and indirectly throughout the day. For example: Daily feelings or emotions, student check-in chart, teachers talking about their own emotions, etc. 8. Plan for and implement extended opportunities for free play and child- centered opportunities to help develop basic executive functioning. 9. Facilitate opportunities for preschoolers to have peer-to-peer interactions.
u89 (x=54) By the end of the preschool experience (approximately 60 months/5 years old), students may: a. Recognize membership in family, neighborhood, school, team, and various
u90 (x=68) other groups and organizations. b. Understand similarities and respect differences among people of diverse
u91 (x=68) backgrounds within their classroom and community. c. Identify emotions using age-appropriate vocabulary and correlate cause
u92 (x=68) and effect to those emotions. d. Utilize positive social skill methods such as communication, trade-offs,
u93 (x=68) common goals, kind actions, etc. to get positive results for obtaining needs and wants from other individuals, classmates, friends, and adults to empathize with others and begin to solve problems. e. Understand how similarities and differences can make a family, classroom,
u94 (x=68) and community stronger.
u95 (x=414) Examples of Learning/Children May: 1. Ask each other for help when needing support with a task. 2. Recognize membership in family, neighborhood, school, team, and various other groups and organizations. 3. Identify examples of times when people can play different roles and bring unique talents to a variety of groups. 4. Have assigned jobs and contribute to the upkeep of the learning classroom. 5. Share problems and celebrations during large-group time. They come up with solutions to the problems in the classroom. 6. Use names of adults and peers. 7. Respond and initiate conversations with peers and adults in the classroom. 8. Demonstrate empathy for others. 9. Encourage preschoolers to appreciate individual similarities and differences.
u96 (x=54) Examples of High-Quality Teaching and Learning Experiences
u97 (x=54) Supportive Teaching Practices/Adults May: 1. Through books, class visitors, field trips, and technology, extend children’s knowledge of what people do in the community. 2. Engage in one-on-one and small group conversations about similarities and differences among individuals. For example: Hair, eyes, skin tone, talents, interests, food preferences, use of assistive devices for communication, hearing, ambulation. 3. Provide books, classroom materials, photos, props, music, etc., that support diversity with respect to race, culture, ethnicity, age, ability and non- stereotyping roles.
u98 (x=108) Preschool, Standard 4. Civics
u101 (x=54) SS.P.4.1
=== page 14 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.5]
u102 SOCIAL STUDIES Preschool, Standard 4. Civics
u103 Prepared Graduates: 7. Analyze the origins, structures, and functions of governments to evaluate the impact on citizens and the global society.
u104 Preschool Learning and Development Expectation: 2. Understand that rules allow groups to work effectively.
u105 Indicators of Progress
u106 By the end of the preschool experience (approximately 60 months/5 years old), students may: a. Understand how rules in the classroom, home, and community keep us safe. b. Show interest in interacting with and developing relationships with others, including those who are African American, Latino, Asian American, Hawaiian/Pacific
u107 Islander, Indigenous Peoples, LGBTQ, and religious minorities. c. Recognize that everyone has rights and responsibilities within a group. d. Demonstrate self-regulated behaviors and problem-solving skills when resolving conflicts. e. Follow classroom routines, rules, and expectations.
u108 Examples of High-Quality Teaching and Learning Experiences
u109 Supportive Teaching Practices/Adults May: 1. Engage preschoolers in developing basic, positively stated classroom rules. 2. Discuss the purpose of rules, such as safety and respect, by modeling rules with preschoolers through reenactment, puppets, etc. 3. Introduce games that have rules. 4. Engage preschoolers in class meetings and decision-making. 5. Give preschoolers classroom responsibilities. 6. Provide and model situations, examples, and activities that require cooperative play and problem solving. 7. Model the classroom routines, rules, and expectations.
u110 Examples of Learning/Children May: 1. Participate in the development of classroom rules. 2. Follow and describe classroom routines, rules, and expectations. 3. Work cooperatively with other children to achieve an outcome. 4. Participate in group decision-making.
u111 (x=108) Preschool, Standard 4. Civics
u114 (x=54) SS.P.4.2
=== page 15 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.6]
u115 SOCIAL STUDIES Preschool, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u116 Prepared Graduates: 8. Apply economic reasoning skills to make informed personal financial decisions.
u117 Preschool Learning and Development Expectation: 1. Identify money and its purpose.
u118 Indicators of Progress
u119 By the end of the preschool experience (approximately 60 months/5 years old), students may: a. Recognize coins and currency as money. b. Identify how money is obtained (e.g., through work or gifts) and how it is used. c. Discuss why we need money. d. Identify different forms of money and their different values.
u120 Examples of High-Quality Teaching and Learning Experiences
u121 Supportive Teaching Practices/Adults May: 1. Provide materials and opportunities for preschoolers to dramatize interactions with currency exchange. 2. Read stories related to currency. 3. Set up dramatic play opportunities that involve the use of pretend money. For example: The bank, grocery store, or restaurant. 4. Use names of coins and currency when talking about money.
u122 Examples of Learning/Children May: 1. Identify that money is used to buy things. 2. Explain that money can be saved. 3. Use pretend money while engaging in dramatic play activities. 4. Practice exchanging play money for goods.
u123 (x=108) Preschool, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u126 (x=54) SS.P.5.1
=== page 16 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.7]
u127 SOCIAL STUDIES Kindergarten, Standard 1. History
u128 Prepared Graduates: 1. Apply the process of inquiry to examine and analyze how historical knowledge is viewed, constructed, and interpreted.
u129 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Ask questions and discuss ideas about the past.
u131 Students Can: a. Ask questions about the past using question starters. For example: What did? Where did? When did? Which did? Who did? Why did? How did? From whose
u132 perspective? b. Identify information from primary and/or secondary sources that answer questions about the past and contribute to the collective memory. c. Provide rationale about something from the past using statements. For example: Because, as a result, I know ___.
u134 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Recognize and describe cause-and-effect relationships about the past (Civic Engagement). 2. Demonstrate curiosity about the past (Creativity and Innovation).
u135 Inquiry Questions: 1. What is history? 2. What do primary sources tell me about the past? 3. How are the lives of people from the past both similar and different from our lives today? 4. What makes something a primary source?
u136 Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers ask and answer questions to guide investigations of people, places, and events in the past. 2. Historical thinkers ask and answer questions about the past. 3. Historical thinkers determine the kinds of sources that will be helpful in answering questions about the past. 4. Historical thinkers communicate conclusions using print, oral, and/or digital technologies to share their ideas about the past with others.
u137 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Generate questions and/or answers when presented with historical sources. 2. Interpret what is read through illustrations. 3. Listen to stories to gain information on a main idea. 4. Gather information and present orally.
u138 (x=108) Kindergarten, Standard 1. History
u141 (x=54) SS.K.1.1
=== page 17 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.8]
u142 SOCIAL STUDIES Kindergarten, Standard 1. History
u143 Prepared Graduates: 2. Analyze historical time periods and patterns of continuity and change, through multiple perspectives, within and among cultures and societies.
u144 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Understand that the sequence of events is important when describing the past.
u146 Students Can: a. Explore differences and similarities in the lives of children and families from different time periods by using a variety of sources. For example: Personal artifacts and
u147 stories, texts, pictures, and videos from different societies. b. Sequence information using words. For example: Present, future, days, weeks, months, years, first, next, last, before, and after. c. Explain why knowing the order of events is important.
u149 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Recognize and describe patterns in the sequence of events from the past (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u150 Inquiry Questions: 1. Why is it important to know the order of events? 2. How is your life and/or family different from other children and families of the past? 3. What happened yesterday and today, and what might happen tomorrow? 4. How have you grown and changed over time?
u151 Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historians arrange events in the order of their occurrence. 2. Historians examine change and/or continuity over a period of time.
u152 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Apply disciplinary concepts of change and continuity to the study of the past. 2. Gather information and present orally.
u153 (x=108) Kindergarten, Standard 1. History
u156 (x=54) SS.K.1.2
=== page 18 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.9]
u157 SOCIAL STUDIES Kindergarten, Standard 2. Geography
u158 Prepared Graduates: 3. Apply geographic representations and perspectives to analyze human movement, spatial patterns, systems, and the connections and relationships among them.
u159 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Recognize that geographic tools represent places and spaces.
u161 Students Can: a. Distinguish between a map and a globe as ways to show places people live. b. Use geographic tools to describe places. For example: Globes, maps, and GPS.
u163 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Find information using geographic technologies (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u164 Inquiry Questions: 1. What information can a map and/or globe give about the places and spaces people live?
u165 Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers distinguish between a map and globe to show places where people live.
u166 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Use developmentally appropriate technology resources to present learning. 2. Identify vocabulary through illustrations. 3. Interpret what is read through illustrations. 4. Generate questions and/or answers when presented with geographic tools such as maps, globes, etc.
u167 (x=108) Kindergarten, Standard 2. Geography
u170 (x=54) SS.K.2.1
=== page 19 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.10]
u171 SOCIAL STUDIES Kindergarten, Standard 2. Geography
u172 Prepared Graduates: 4. Examine the characteristics of places and regions, and the changing nature among geographic and human interactions.
u173 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Identify how the environment influences the way people live.
u175 Students Can: a. Identify ways students’ lives are similar and different from those in other communities. b. Identify how the environment, geographic features, and climate impact lifestyles. For example: Food, sports, shelter, transportation, school, etc.
u177 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Compare attitudes and beliefs as an individual to others (Social Awareness). 2. Recognize and describe cause-and-effect relationships between people and their surroundings (Social Awareness).
u178 Inquiry Questions: 1. What would it be like to live in another community, region, city, state, or country? 2. What makes a community special to the people who live there, and how is it different from what makes our community special? 3. How do the environment, geographic features, and climate impact how people live within a community?
u179 Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers investigate other cultures and how they have been influenced by the climate, physical geography, and cultures of an area. 2. Geographic thinkers understand that people live in different settings and interact with their environment based on location. For example: People living in colder climates wear more clothes, and people in areas where there are floods live on higher ground or in houses on stilts.
u180 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Use developmentally appropriate technology resources to present learning. 2. Identify vocabulary through illustrations. 3. Interpret what is read through illustrations. 4. Pose and respond to questions and contribute to the discussion about a topic or text in order to advance the dialogue.
u181 (x=108) Kindergarten, Standard 2. Geography
u184 (x=54) SS.K.2.2
=== page 20 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.11]
u185 SOCIAL STUDIES Kindergarten, Standard 3. Economics
u186 Prepared Graduates: 5. Evaluate how scarce resources are allocated in societies through the analysis of individual choice, market interaction, and public policy.
u187 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Explain how individuals make choices based on needs and wants.
u189 Students Can: a. Identify the costs and benefits of a choice an individual makes when acquiring an item. b. Recognize and engage in ways to use another individual’s items. For example: Asking for permission to share and taking turns.
u191 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Recognize that problems can be identified, and possible solutions can be created when making choices (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u192 Inquiry Questions: 1. What are the costs and benefits of ownership? For example: Borrowing a toy from a friend or owning one of your own? 2. What do we do if there is not enough of something we all want (scarcity)? 3. How can we take care of resources that belong to everyone? For example: Water, air, etc.
u193 Nature and Skills of Economics: 1. Economic thinkers study ownership as a key principle of economics. 2. Economic thinkers understand that some items are more desired than others and are more in demand. 3. Individuals interact with each other and the concept of ownership on a daily basis. For example: People purchase items for their use, donate items for others to use, and ask for permission to use someone else’s items.
u194 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Apply disciplinary concepts such as decision-making techniques to make a choice. 2. Technology is used to indicate and keep track of ownership. For example: Pets may have microchips and libraries use barcodes to keep track of their books.
u195 (x=108) Kindergarten, Standard 3. Economics
u198 (x=54) SS.K.3.1
=== page 21 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.12]
u199 SOCIAL STUDIES Kindergarten, Standard 4. Civics
u200 Prepared Graduates: 6. Express an understanding of how civic participation affects policy by applying the rights and responsibilities of a citizen.
u201 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Identify ways in which civic participation takes place across multiple groups.
u203 Students Can: a. Differentiate among examples of civic participation. For example: Describe personal connections to community events, such as voting, debating, running for office,
u204 advocating, fundraising, and volunteering. b. Explain the qualities of an informed and engaged citizen. c. Practice citizenship skills when working with others including courtesy, honesty, and fairness. d. Identify the difference between fact and opinion.
u206 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Compare one’s attitudes and beliefs about civic participation to others (Civic Engagement). 2. Identify and reflect upon personal connections to community systems (Civic Engagement).
u207 Inquiry Questions: 1. What can I do when I disagree with someone or something? 2. Why do we vote? 3. What qualities make people responsible and engaged citizens? 4. Why do we use evidence to support our opinions? 5. Where can I get factual information when I need to answer questions?
u208 Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals know the importance of fairness and conflict resolution. 2. Civic-minded individuals understand that decisions are made cooperatively. For example: Families may vote on which movie to see, and classes may vote on which project they will do.
u209 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. With guidance and support from adults, recall information from experiences or gather information from provided sources to answer a question. 2. Participate in collaborative discussions by coming to discussions prepared. 3. Follow rules for discussions, set goals, fulfill roles in collaborative groups.
u210 (x=108) Kindergarten, Standard 4. Civics
u213 (x=54) SS.K.4.1
=== page 22 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.13]
u214 SOCIAL STUDIES Kindergarten, Standard 4. Civics
u215 Prepared Graduates: 7. Analyze the origins, structures, and functions of governments to evaluate the impact on citizens and the global society.
u216 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Participate in making logical decisions using democratic principles.
u218 (x=414) Inquiry Questions: 1. What would it look like to have no rules in the classroom? 2. How might personal actions impact outcomes? 3. In what ways is it enriching to have friends who are different from me? How do I learn about others who are different from me? 4. Why is it important to hear what friends from different backgrounds (cultures, races, languages, religions, family composition, etc.) have to say? 5. What can you do to be an active and helpful member of your class and school? 6. Why is it important for all students to be treated fairly?
u219 (x=54) Students Can: a. Explain why rules are needed. b. Create and follow classroom rules. c. Explain how a class rule may promote fairness and resolve conflict and
u220 (x=68) compare against a rule that may not. d. Contribute to making and maintaining class community decisions. e. Explain the difference between democratic decision-making and decisions
u221 (x=68) made by authorities. For example: A parent, teacher, principal, and a police officer.
u222 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals study citizen participation and structures that bring security and stability to community life. 2. Civic-minded individuals understand that individual actions can make the community better. For example: People clean up highways or volunteer in shelters.
u224 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Within democratic traditions, articulate personal strengths and challenges using information and communication technologies to express themselves (Self-Awareness). 2. Recognize how personal actions have had a positive or negative impact with feedback as needed (Self-Awareness).
u225 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Interpret what is read through illustrations. 2. Listen and participate as a member of the classroom community. 3. Follow rules for discussions, set goals, and fulfill roles in collaborative groups.
u226 (x=108) Kindergarten, Standard 4. Civics
u229 (x=54) SS.K.4.2
=== page 23 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.14]
u230 SOCIAL STUDIES Kindergarten, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u231 Prepared Graduates: 8. Apply economic reasoning skills to make informed personal financial decisions.
u232 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Describe choices people make about how to use the money they earn.
u234 (x=414) Inquiry Questions: 1. What is money? What is currency? For example: Cash, coins, credit card, debit card. 2. How do people make choices when they want something? 3. How do people make choices about what to buy when there isn’t enough money to buy everything? For example: Balancing between wants and needs. 4. What is the difference between a want and a need? 5. What are things all humans need? 6. How can money help people to meet their wants and needs? 7. Why do we use money?
u235 (x=54) Students Can: a. Recognize choices people make with their money and explain how financial
u236 (x=68) decisions are made. b. Explain how money gives people the ability to buy goods and services. c. Identify the difference between a want and a need and how that impacts
u237 (x=68) purchasing decisions when resources are limited. For example: Buying a healthy snack vs. a candy bar, new shoes vs. a new toy, or a coat vs. a new game.
u239 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Make personal financial decisions based on spending options (Self- Advocacy and Initiative). 2. Determine how to spend money depending on values and choices (Self- Advocacy and Initiative). 3. Demonstrate curiosity, imagination, and eagerness to learn more (Creativity and Innovation).
u240 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Economics (PFL): 1. Financially capable individuals differentiate between wants and needs. 2. Financially capable individuals make choices about purchasing to serve wants and needs. For example: Parents pay bills prior to purchasing movie tickets or toys.
u241 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Compare the benefits and costs of individual choices. 2. Identify positive and negative incentives that influence the decisions that people make. 3. Explain the role of money in making exchange easier.
u242 (x=108) Kindergarten, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u245 (x=54) SS.K.5.1
=== page 24 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.15 | SS.1.1.1]
u246 SOCIAL STUDIES First Grade, Standard 1. History
u247 Prepared Graduates: 1. Apply the process of inquiry to examine and analyze how historical knowledge is viewed, constructed, and interpreted.
u248 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Ask questions and discuss ideas about patterns and chronological order of events from the past.
u250 Students Can: a. Arrange life events in chronological order. b. Use words related to time, sequence, and change. For example: Past, present, future, change, first, next, and last. c. Identify the organizational components of a calendar. For example: Year, months, weeks, days, and notable events. d. Determine events from the past, present, and future, using the components of a calendar. e. Distinguish between primary and secondary sources. f. Identify information from primary and/or secondary sources that answer questions about patterns and chronological order of events from the past.
u252 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Recognize and describe cause-and-effect relationships and patterns from the past (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Demonstrate curiosity about patterns from the past (Creativity and Innovation).
u253 Inquiry Questions: 1. Why is it important to know the order of events? 2. How do we organize time? 3. What has happened in your life and what does that tell you about yourself?
u254 Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers examine change and/or continuity over a period of time. 2. Historical thinkers record events in sequential order to increase understanding, see relationships, understand cause and effect, and organize information.
u255 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Apply disciplinary concepts of change and continuity to the study of the past. 2. Read and/or listen to historical fiction.
u256 (x=108) First Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 25 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.16 | SS.1.1.2]
u260 SOCIAL STUDIES First Grade, Standard 1. History
u261 Prepared Graduates: 2. Analyze historical time periods and patterns of continuity and change, through multiple perspectives, within and among cultures and societies.
u262 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Explain how the diverse perspectives and traditions of families from many cultures have shaped the United States.
u264 (x=414) Inquiry Questions: 1. How are different cultures represented in our community? 2. What is culture? 3. How do I learn about others’ perspectives and share my own? 4. How are cultures different from and similar to one another?
u265 (x=54) Students Can: a. Identify the unique characteristics of oneself as well as the similarities and
u266 (x=68) differences between themselves and others. For example: Eye color, ability, individuality, family composition, etc. b. Discuss common and unique characteristics of different cultures, including
u267 (x=414) Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers understand the importance of comparing and contrasting to identify patterns within and between cultures. 2. Historical thinkers use sources to make interpretations about cultural groups from the past. 3. Historical thinkers recognize symbols as cultural artifacts that can be interpreted to make meaning of both the past and present. 4. Historical thinkers compare multiple perspectives of people and groups of people in order to draw conclusions about both the past and the present.
u268 (x=68) African American, Latino, Asian American, Hawaiian/Pacific Islanders, Indigenous Peoples, LGBTQ, and religious minorities, using multiple sources of information. c. Understand that the United States is made up of the diverse perspectives
u269 (x=68) and traditions of many cultures. For example: The diversity of foods available in the local community.
u271 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Compare one’s attitudes and beliefs to others (Global and Cultural Awareness). 2. Identify and explain several cultural perspectives that constitute our diverse society (Global and Cultural Awareness).
u272 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Apply the disciplinary concept of perspective-taking to the study of the past. 2. Identify self-perspective.
u273 (x=108) First Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 26 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.17 | SS.1.2.1]
u277 SOCIAL STUDIES First Grade, Standard 2. Geography
u278 Prepared Graduates: 3. Apply geographic representations and perspectives to analyze human movement, spatial patterns, systems, and the connections and relationships among them.
u279 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Use geographic terms and tools to describe places and spaces.
u281 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers use geographic tools to study and represent places. 2. Geographic thinkers use geographic terms, tools, and technology in work and play to describe and find places. For example: Pilots use maps to make flight plans, hikers use compasses to determine directions, and vacationers use maps to find unfamiliar places. 3. Geographic thinkers use addresses to help locate places. For example: Knowing an address is necessary for an ambulance to find a location or for an individual to receive mail.
u282 (x=54) Students Can: a. Explain that maps and globes are different representations of Earth. b. Describe locations using terms related to direction and distance. For
u283 (x=68) example: Forward and backward, left and right, near and far, is next to, and close. c. Recite an address including city, state, and country, and explain how those
u284 (x=68) labels help find places on a map. d. Distinguish between land and water on a map and globe. e. Create simple maps showing both human and natural features.
u285 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Apply the disciplinary concept of geographic perspective to identify and reflect upon their place in the world. 2. Integrate multimedia as effective tools for presenting and clarifying information.
u287 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Identify key attributes of a variety of geographic tools. For example: Globes, maps, and GPS (Data Literacy). 2. Find information using geographic technologies (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u288 Inquiry Questions: 1. How would an individual describe how to get somewhere without an address? 2. What if we didn’t know how to use geographic tools? 3. Why can’t a round globe be represented accurately on a flat map? 4. Why don’t people carry globes to help find their way? 5. Why is an address necessary?
u289 (x=108) First Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 27 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.18 | SS.1.2.2]
u293 SOCIAL STUDIES First Grade, Standard 2. Geography
u294 Prepared Graduates: 4. Examine the characteristics of places and regions, and the changing nature among geographic and human interactions.
u295 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Describe the characteristics of a community and how they are influenced by the environment.
u297 Students Can: a. Provide examples of how individuals and families interact with their environment. b. Analyze how weather, climate and environmental characteristics influence individuals and the cultural characteristics of a family. c. Compare and contrast at least two different communities with respect to schools, neighborhoods, and culture.
u299 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Identify and reflect upon personal connections to one or more families within the community (Social Awareness). 2. Make observations and draw conclusions about the relationship between groups of people and their surroundings (Social Awareness).
u300 Inquiry Questions: 1. How are other communities both similar to and different from your community? 2. Why do people celebrate traditions? 3. How do people use resources in the local community? 4. How do individuals in the community use the environment?
u301 Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers study resources and their availability and use them as a key to understand human interactions with their environment and each other. 2. Geographic thinkers study human and environmental interactions and the consequences of those interactions. 3. Geographic thinkers understand that people from various cultures are both similar and different and that these differences may be reflected in clothing, language, and culture, etc. 4. Geographic thinkers understand that boundaries and the need for boundaries affect everyday life. For example: Boundary lines determine who owns a piece of property.
u302 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Use disciplinary vocabulary in sentences. 2. Identify maps, graphs, charts, and diagrams as sources of information.
u303 (x=108) First Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 28 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.19 | SS.1.3.1]
u307 SOCIAL STUDIES First Grade, Standard 3. Economics
u308 Prepared Graduates: 5. Evaluate how scarce resources are allocated in societies through the analysis of individual choice, market interaction, and public policy.
u309 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Understand that individuals work in different types of jobs to earn an income.
u311 Students Can: a. Identify the goods and/or services that different types of businesses produce in the local community. b. Give examples of different types of jobs held by family members and/or individuals in the local community. c. Compare at least two different job choices that individuals have with respect to the benefits and costs of each job.
u313 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Ask questions to learn more about careers and other life pursuits (Career Awareness). 2. Demonstrate an understanding of cause and effect related to personal decisions such as jobs (Self-Awareness).
u314 Inquiry Questions: 1. How are businesses different? 2. What are the different types of jobs and their roles in a community? 3. Why do people choose different jobs?
u315 Nature and Skills of Economics: 1. Economic thinkers investigate the influence of different jobs and businesses in their community.
u316 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Apply disciplinary concepts, such as decision-making, to determine the benefits and costs of a particular choice.
u317 (x=108) First Grade, Standard 3. Economics
=== page 29 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.20 | SS.1.4.1]
u321 SOCIAL STUDIES First Grade, Standard 4. Civics
u322 Prepared Graduates: 6. Express an understanding of how civic participation affects policy by applying the rights and responsibilities of a citizen.
u323 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Summarize how effective groups have responsible leaders and team members.
u325 Students Can: a. Describe the characteristics of responsible leaders and how they communicate with others. b. Identify the attributes of a responsible team member and how they communicate with others. c. Demonstrate the ability to be both a leader and team member. d. Describe the qualities of an effective team. For example: Respectful disagreement, advocating for self and others, sharing responsibilities, and including others’
u326 perspectives. e. Listen and consider the ideas of others in order to make decisions as a group.
u328 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Recognize personal characteristics, preferences, thoughts, and feelings regarding leadership (Self-Awareness). 2. Recognize emotional responses to ideas that differ from one’s own when working in a group setting (Adaptability and Flexibility). 3. Recognize how members of a community rely on each other, considering personal contributions as applicable (Collaboration and Teamwork).
u329 Inquiry Questions: 1. How do you know if you are a responsible leader? 2. How do you know if you are a responsible team member? 3. How do you know when you are working with an effective team? 4. How can you show respectful listening and learning from team members? 5. Where can we get factual information when we need to answer questions and make decisions for our group/team?
u330 Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals know how to be a good leader and team member. 2. Civic-minded individuals work together as a team toward a collective goal that honors the views of its members.
u331 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Write informative/explanatory texts in which they name a topic, supply some facts about the topic, and provide some sense of closure. 2. Use credible sources to check for accuracy when gathering information and making decisions.
u332 (x=108) First Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 30 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.21 | SS.1.4.2]
u336 SOCIAL STUDIES First Grade, Standard 4. Civics
u337 Prepared Graduates: 7. Analyze the origins, structures, and functions of governments to evaluate the impact on citizens and the global society.
u338 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Identify and explain how the significance of notable people, places, holidays, and civic symbols reflect the origins and values of the government and its citizens.
u340 Students Can: a. Identify and explain the relevance of notable civic leaders from different community groups, including African American, Latino, Asian American, Hawaiian/Pacific
u341 Islander, Indigenous Peoples, LGBTQ, and religious minorities. b. Identify and explain the meaning of various civic symbols important to diverse community groups. For example: The American flag, the National Anthem, Statue of
u342 Liberty, Mount Rushmore, Crazy Horse Memorial, Liberty Bell, Emancipation Proclamation, a yellow sash (i.e., for women’s rights), tribal flags of Native Nations whose ancestral homelands include present-day Colorado, LGBTQ Pride Flag, and the Colorado Flag. c. Identify and explain the relevance of significant civic places. For example: The state and national Capitol, the White House, and sites within the local community. d. Explain the significance of major civic holidays. For example: Veterans Day, Martin Luther King Day, Independence Day, Presidents’ Day, Memorial Day, Juneteenth,
u343 Labor Day, Indigenous Peoples Day, and César Chávez Day.
u345 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Compare attitudes and beliefs as an individual to others (Civic Engagement). 2. Recognize diversity among notable people, places, holidays, and civic symbols that constitute multiple perspectives within society (Global and Cultural Awareness).
u346 Inquiry Questions: 1. Why do we have national, community, and local celebrations and holidays? 2. Who are notable people in the development of our country and community? 3. How are new national symbols, songs, or holidays created?
u347 Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Responsible community members see communities as multidimensional entities. 2. Symbols, songs, holidays, traditions, places, and people help to provide identity for the community and nation.
u348 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Write opinion pieces in which they introduce the topic they are writing about, state an opinion, supply a reason for the opinion, and provide some sense of closure. 2. With guidance and support from adults, focus on a topic, respond to questions and suggestions from peers, and add details to strengthen writing as needed.
u349 (x=108) First Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 31 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.22 | SS.1.5.1]
u353 SOCIAL STUDIES First Grade, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u354 Prepared Graduates: 8. Apply economic reasoning skills to make informed personal financial decisions.
u355 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Plan how to spend, share, and save money.
u357 Students Can: a. Discuss ways to earn or receive money. b. Identify types of currency and how currency is used. For example: Cash, coins, credit card, and debit card. c. Define types of transactions such as deposit, purchase, borrow, donate, and barter. d. Find the value of a collection of a variety of coins.
u359 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Consider how to earn, spend, share, and save money knowing funds in any scenario are limited (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Determine different choices they can make with their money and how those choices may affect others (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 3. Demonstrate curiosity, imagination, and eagerness to learn more (Creativity/Innovation).
u360 Inquiry Questions: 1. How does an individual earn money? 2. What are different methods of payment? 3. Are all items purchased with money? 4. How do charities, non-profits, and other organizations help a community?
u361 Nature and Skills of Economics (PFL): 1. Financially capable individuals understand that financial goals can be met through planning. For example: An individual divides income between current expenses, saving for the future, and philanthropic donations.
u362 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Compare the benefits and costs of individual choices. 2. Identify positive and negative incentives that influence the decisions people make. 3. Explain the role of money in making exchange easier.
u363 (x=108) First Grade, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
=== page 32 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.23 | SS.2.1.1]
u367 SOCIAL STUDIES Second Grade, Standard 1. History
u368 Prepared Graduates: 1. Apply the process of inquiry to examine and analyze how historical knowledge is viewed, constructed, and interpreted.
u369 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Ask questions and discuss ideas taken from primary and secondary sources.
u371 Students Can: a. Explain that the nature of history involves stories of the past preserved in various primary and secondary sources. For example: Images, oral and written accounts,
u372 etc. b. Organize historical events by creating timelines and explaining the information conveyed by them. c. Identify local historical primary and secondary sources from multiple diverse perspectives and generate questions about their functions, significance, and
u373 perspective. For example: Maps, photographs, letters, etc.
u375 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Identify key attributes of a variety of information products. For example: Books, newspapers, online or print articles, etc. (Media Literacy). 2. Demonstrate curiosity about events and people from the past using primary and secondary sources (Media Literacy).
u376 Inquiry Questions: 1. How can two people understand the same event differently? 2. Why is it important to use more than one source for information? 3. How can putting events in order by time help describe the past? 4. What kinds of tools and sources do historical thinkers use to investigate the past?
u377 Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers gather firsthand accounts of history through a variety of sources, including differing accounts of the same event. 2. Historical thinkers use primary sources to investigate the past.
u378 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Apply disciplinary concepts such as perspective to create accounts of the past. 2. Listen for main idea and sequence of events in a social studies text. 3. Analyze different texts (including experiments, simulations, video, or multimedia texts) to compare and contrast competing theories, points of view, and arguments in the discipline.
u379 (x=108) Second Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 33 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.24 | SS.2.1.2]
u383 SOCIAL STUDIES Second Grade, Standard 1. History
u384 Prepared Graduates: 2. Analyze historical time periods and patterns of continuity and change, through multiple perspectives, within and among cultures and societies.
u385 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Describe how people of various cultures influence neighborhoods and communities over time.
u387 Students Can: a. Compare and contrast neighborhoods and/or communities, both past and present, through studies of their people and events. For example: The National Western
u388 Stock Show, state/county fairs, and community events. b. Describe the changes within one neighborhood and/or community over time. c. Analyze the interactions and contributions of various people and cultures that have lived in or migrated to neighborhoods and/or communities, including African
u389 Americans, Latinos, Asian Americans, Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, Indigenous Peoples, LGBTQ, and religious minorities.
u391 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Recognize and describe cause-and-effect relationships and patterns in everyday experiences (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Recognize and describe patterns within and between neighborhoods and communities (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 3. Investigate to make observations and draw conclusions about neighborhoods and communities (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u392 Inquiry Questions: 1. What are the cultural attributes of a neighborhood or community? 2. How can understanding the past impact our understanding of communities today? 3. How have people, events, and ideas from the past shaped the identity of communities and neighborhoods today?
u393 Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers investigate relationships between the past and present. 2. Historical thinkers organize findings in chronological order as one way to examine and describe the past. 3. Historical thinkers examine concepts of change, continuity, and causation in order to explain the past.
u394 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Apply disciplinary concepts such as change, continuity, and causation to create accounts of neighborhoods and communities in the past. 2. Demonstrate positive social behaviors when using technology. 3. Begin to identify differing perspectives.
u395 (x=108) Second Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 34 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.25 | SS.2.2.1]
u399 SOCIAL STUDIES Second Grade, Standard 2. Geography
u400 Prepared Graduates: 3. Apply geographic representations and perspectives to analyze human movement, spatial patterns, systems, and the connections and relationships among them.
u401 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Use geographic terms and tools to locate and describe spatial patterns and places.
u403 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers use visual representations of the environment. 2. Geographic thinkers identify data and reference points to understand space and place.
u404 (x=54) Students Can: a. Use map keys, legends, symbols, intermediate directions, and a compass
u405 (x=68) rose to locate and describe spaces and places. b. Identify the purpose of the map being presented. For example: A weather
u406 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Construct maps, graphs, and other representations of familiar places. 2. Describe spaces and places and the relationships and interactions that shape them using geographic tools. For example: Maps, graphs, photographs, and other representations. 3. Use maps, globes, and other geographic models to identify cultural and environmental characteristics of places. 4. Analyze and use information presented visually in a text that supports the words in a text. For example: Graphs, charts, flowcharts, diagrams, models, and tables. 5. Analyze different texts (including experiments, simulations, video, or multimedia texts) to compare competing theories, points of view, and arguments in the discipline.
u407 (x=68) map vs. street map. c. Identify the hemispheres, Equator/Prime Meridian, and the North/South
u408 (x=68) poles. d. Identify and locate cultural, human, political, and natural features using
u409 (x=68) map keys and legends.
u411 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Identify key attributes of a variety of geographic tools. For example: Globes, maps, and a compass rose (Data Literacy). 2. Find information using geographic technologies. For example: GPS and satellite imagery (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u412 Inquiry Questions: 1. How do you define, organize, and think about the space around you? 2. What is a human feature and a physical feature? 3. Why do we use geographic tools such as maps, globes, grids, symbols, and keys? 4. How would you describe a location without using geographic words? 5. How can using the wrong geographic tool or term cause problems?
u413 (x=108) Second Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 35 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.26 | SS.2.2.2]
u417 SOCIAL STUDIES Second Grade, Standard 2. Geography
u418 Prepared Graduates: 4. Examine the characteristics of places and regions, and the changing nature among geographic and human interactions.
u419 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Explain how people in communities manage, modify, and depend on their environment.
u421 (x=414) 2. Geographic thinkers study the uneven distribution and management of resources. 3. Geographic thinkers recognize that problems can be identified, and possible solutions can be created. 4. Geographic thinkers identify and reflect upon personal connections to community systems. 5. Geographic thinkers understand that they must manage resources in the environment such as conserving water, safeguarding clean air, managing electricity needs, and reducing the amount of waste. 6. Geographic thinkers, within communities, collaborate to modify, manage, and depend on the environment. For example: Elected officials decide how to manage resources, and communities may limit hunting, water usage, or other activities. 7. Geographic technology is used to gather, track, and communicate how resources might be managed or modified. For example: Ski areas track snowfall rates, analyze data for avalanche danger and even create snow.
u422 (x=54) Students Can: a. Explain how communities manage and use nonrenewable and renewable
u423 (x=68) resources. b. Explain how the environment influences why people settle in certain areas. c. Identify examples of how human activity influences environmental
u424 (x=68) characteristics of a place over time. d. Identify examples of how culture and lifestyle are impacted by
u425 (x=68) environmental characteristics.
u427 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Recognize problems within a community related to the environment and their respective solutions (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Make observations and draw conclusions about the relationship between a community and their environment (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u428 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Describe how human activities affect the cultural and environmental characteristics of spaces or places. 2. Generate questions to guide research, gather information from print and digital sources, determine biases and credibility of sources, cite sources accurately, and use evidence to answer their research question. 3. Demonstrate positive social behaviors when using technology. 4. Synthesize information from multiple sources to demonstrate understanding of a topic.
u429 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. How do available resources and their uses impact a community? 2. How do we know when we are being good stewards of renewable and non- renewable resources? For example: Reduce, reuse, and recycle. 3. How does the environment influence people’s decisions about where they live? 4. How do humans change the environment of a place over time? 5. How does the environment influence the culture and lifestyles of a place?
u430 Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers compare information and data and recognize that environmental factors influence change in communities.
u431 (x=108) Second Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 36 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.27 | SS.2.3.1]
u435 SOCIAL STUDIES Second Grade, Standard 3. Economics
u436 Prepared Graduates: 5. Evaluate how scarce resources are allocated in societies through the analysis of individual choice, market interaction, and public policy.
u437 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Explain how scarcity of resources means individuals may not have access to the goods and services they want or need.
u439 Students Can: a. Explain scarcity of goods and resources. b. Identify and categorize goods and services and provide examples of each. c. Give examples of choices people make when resources are scarce. d. Identify possible solutions when there are limited resources and unlimited wants.
u441 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Demonstrate an understanding of cause and effect related to personal decisions (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Recognize problems that arise from scarcity and their respective solutions (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u442 Inquiry Questions: 1. How does scarcity affect purchasing decisions? 2. What goods and services do you use? 3. How are resources used in various communities? 4. What do people and communities do when a resource is scarce?
u443 Nature and Skills of Economics: 1. Economic thinkers analyze choices that individuals make to predict patterns and determine demand. 2. Economic thinkers analyze how goods and services are produced and priced. 3. Economic thinkers analyze scarcity of resources and its impact on the cost of goods and services.
u444 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Apply disciplinary concepts such as decision-making, exchange, and markets to determine the benefits and costs of a particular choice.
u445 (x=108) Second Grade, Standard 3. Economics
=== page 37 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.28 | SS.2.4.1]
u449 SOCIAL STUDIES Second Grade, Standard 4. Civics
u450 Prepared Graduates: 6. Express an understanding of how civic participation affects policy by applying the rights and responsibilities of a citizen.
u451 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Investigate ways in which ideas and actions can improve communities.
u453 (x=414) 5. How do we make sure that all perspectives are represented? 6. What are responsible ways to gather information in order to make informed decisions and advocate for the community? 7. How do we know when information is factual or someone’s opinion? How does that influence how I use the information?
u454 (x=54) Students Can: a. Compare ways that people may effectively express their ideas and
u455 (x=68) viewpoints while being respectful to others. b. Analyze how community members, including African American, Latino,
u456 (x=68) Asian American, Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, Indigenous Peoples, LGBTQ, and religious minorities advocate for their interests and responsibly influence decisions in their community. c. Describe ways in which you can take an active part in improving your school
u457 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals listen and participate responsibly as a member of a group. 2. Civic-minded individuals collaborate to responsibly advocate for the ideas they think will improve society. For example: A group lobbies the city council to create a new park or employ more firefighters.
u458 (x=68) or community. d. Identify and compare examples of civic responsibilities, such as
u459 (x=68) volunteering in the community, that are important to privileged and marginalized individuals, families, and communities. e. Describe the characteristics that enable a community member to engage in
u460 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Use technology resources for problem solving, communication, and illustration of thoughts and ideas. 2. Compare and contrast the most important points presented by two texts on the same topic. 3. Write opinion pieces in which students introduce the topic or book they are writing about, state an opinion, supply reasons that support the opinion, use linking words (e.g., because, and, also) to connect opinion and reasons, and provide a concluding statement or section. 4. Write informative/explanatory texts in which students introduce a topic, use facts and definitions to develop points, and provide a concluding statement or section. 5. Present arguments or information in a logical sequence with a clear claim, supportive evidence, and effective presence that builds credibility.
u461 (x=68) the community responsibly and effectively.
u463 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Identify and reflect upon personal connections to community systems (Civic Engagement). 2. Model positive behaviors for others (Civic Engagement).
u464 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. What are beliefs that help people live together in communities? 2. What civic responsibilities do you think are important? 3. How can different cultures and beliefs influence a community? 4. What are responsible ways to advocate for ideas in a community?
u465 (x=108) Second Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 38 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.29 | SS.2.4.2]
u469 SOCIAL STUDIES Second Grade, Standard 4. Civics
u470 Prepared Graduates: 7. Analyze the origins, structures, and functions of governments to evaluate the impact on citizens and the global society.
u471 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Explain the roles and characteristics of people who govern different communities.
u473 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals examine how culture influences the disposition of rules, laws, rights, and responsibilities. 2. Civic-minded individuals can identify the President of the United States, the Governor of Colorado, and other elected officials. 3. Civic-minded individuals can discuss the responsibilities of the governor and other elected officials to make and enforce laws.
u474 (x=54) Students Can: a. Identify the role(s)of government. For example: Establish order, provide
u475 (x=68) security, and accomplish common goals. b. Identify the roles and characteristics of various leaders at the local, state,
u476 (x=68) and national levels. For example: The President of the United States, the Governor of Colorado, and the city mayor. c. Identify qualities of positive leadership and how leaders contribute to a
u477 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Begin to identify differing perspectives. 2. Use technology resources for problem solving, communication, and illustration of thoughts and ideas. 3. Analyze different texts (including experiments, simulations, video, or multimedia texts) to compare and contrast competing theories, points of view, and arguments in the discipline.
u478 (x=68) group or community. d. Identify services provided by the local or state government. For example:
u479 (x=68) police and fire protection, maintenance of roads, and snow removal.
u481 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Compare attitudes and beliefs as an individual to others (Social Awareness). 2. Appropriately express a range of emotions to communicate personal ideas/needs (Self-Management).
u482 Inquiry Questions: 1. What can happen when someone has too much power and/or authority and abuses it? 2. What are ways leaders collaborate to solve differences? 3. What are the characteristics of positive leaders? 4. Who are positive leaders in the group or community? 5. What are some examples in the community of people helping others? For example: Collecting food for the hungry.
u483 (x=108) Second Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 39 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.30 | SS.2.5.1]
u487 SOCIAL STUDIES Second Grade, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u488 Prepared Graduates: 8. Apply economic reasoning skills to make informed personal financial decisions.
u489 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Investigate costs and benefits to make informed financial decisions.
u491 (x=414) Inquiry Questions: 1. What is a financial goal? 2. What strategies can help individuals achieve their financial goals? 3. What influences your financial goals and priorities? 4. How do individuals analyze the positive and negative consequences of financial decisions? 5. How can I use my math skills and strategies to help me make financial decisions?
u492 (x=54) Students Can: a. Assess priorities when making financial decisions. b. Classify financial goals. For example: A need or want, or short-term or long-
u493 (x=68) term goals. c. Recognize that different goods and services have different monetary values. d. Acknowledge that financial priorities vary among people and communities
u494 (x=68) for goods and services. For example: Going to the hairdresser, buying brand name items. e. Predict positive and negative consequences when making financial
u495 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Economics (PFL): 1. Financially capable individuals use good decision-making tools in planning their spending and saving. 2. Financially capable individuals make financial decisions based on responsible evaluation of the consequences. 3. Financially capable individuals make purchase decisions based on such things as quality, price, and personal goals. For example: You decide whether to spend money on candy or the movies.
u496 (x=68) decisions. For example: If… Then… decision making. f. Solve simple financial word problems to aid in making financial decisions.
u497 (x=68) For example: A video game costs $20.  If I earn $5 per week in allowance, I will need to save for ____ weeks to earn enough money.
u499 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Identify consequences (positive and negative) of a financial decision (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Understand how to reduce risk depending on the financial choices they make (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 3. Demonstrate an understanding of cause and effect related to different financial decisions (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u500 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Report on a topic or text, tell a story, or recount an experience with appropriate facts and relevant, descriptive details, speaking clearly at an understandable pace. 2. Compare the benefits and costs of individual choices. 3. Identify positive and negative incentives that influence the decisions people make. 4. Present arguments or information in a logical sequence with a clear claim, supportive evidence, and effective presence that builds credibility.
u501 (x=108) Second Grade, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
=== page 40 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.31 | SS.3.1.1]
u505 SOCIAL STUDIES Third Grade, Standard 1. History
u506 Prepared Graduates: 1. Apply the process of inquiry to examine and analyze how historical knowledge is viewed, constructed, and interpreted.
u507 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Compare primary and secondary sources when explaining the past.
u509 (x=414) 3. Historical thinkers compare information provided by different historical sources about the past. 4. Historical thinkers infer the intended audience and purpose of a historical source from information within the source itself. 5. Historical thinkers use information about a historical source, including the author, date, place of origin, intended audience, and purpose to judge the extent to which the source is useful. 6. Historical thinkers make inferences about the intended audience and purpose of a primary source from information within the source itself.
u510 (x=54) Students Can: a. Compare primary sources with works of fiction about the same topic. b. Use a variety of primary sources such as artifacts, pictures, oral histories,
u511 (x=68) and documents, to help determine factual information about historical events. c. Compare information from multiple sources recounting the same event.
u513 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Determine the kinds of sources that will be helpful in answering compelling and supporting questions, taking into consideration the different opinions people have about how to answer the questions. 2. Gather relevant information from multiple sources while using the origin, structure, and context to guide the selection. 3. Use distinctions between fact and opinion to determine the credibility of multiple sources. 4. Distinguish their own point of view from that of the author. 5. Compare and contrast the most important points and key details presented in two texts on the same topic. 6. Write opinion pieces on topics or texts, supporting a point of view with reasons. 7. Use evidence to develop claims in response to compelling questions. 8. Communicate information through the use of technologies.
u514 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Articulate the most effective kinds of historical sources to access information needed for understanding historic events (Media Literacy). 2. Ask questions to develop further understanding of reliability of various kinds of historical sources (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u515 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. How do historical fact, opinion and fiction uniquely influence an individual’s understanding of history? 2. How do historical thinkers determine the accuracy of history? 3. What types of questions do historical thinkers ask about the past? 4. Why do historical thinkers use multiple sources in studying history?
u516 (x=54) Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers use primary sources to distinguish fact from fiction. 2. Historical thinkers distinguish fact from fiction when used to make informed decisions. For example: Consumers must critically analyze advertisements for facts, and nonfiction writers must verify historical accuracy.
u517 (x=108) Third Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 41 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.32 | SS.3.1.2]
u521 SOCIAL STUDIES Third Grade, Standard 1. History
u522 Prepared Graduates: 2. Analyze historical time periods and patterns of continuity and change, through multiple perspectives, within and among cultures and societies.
u523 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Identify how people in the past influence the development and interaction of different communities or regions.
u525 (x=414) 3. Historical thinkers use context and information from the past to make connections and inform decisions in the present. For example: The development and traditions of various groups in a region affect the economic development, tourist industry, and cultural makeup of a community. 4. Historical thinkers construct explanations using reasoning, correct sequence, examples, and details with relevant information and data. 5. Historical thinkers explain probable causes and effects of events.
u526 (x=54) Students Can: a. Compare past and present situations and events. b. Give examples of people, events, and developments that brought important
u527 (x=68) changes to a community or region. c. Describe the history, interaction, and contribution of various peoples and
u528 (x=68) cultures, including African American, Latino, Asian American, Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, Indigenous Peoples, LGBTQ, and religious minorities that have lived in or migrated to a community or region and how that migration has influenced change and development.
u529 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Compare and contrast the most important points and key details presented in two texts on the same topic. 2. Introduce a topic or text, state an opinion, and create an organizational structure that lists reasons. 3. Provide reasons that support an opinion. 4. Provide a concluding statement or section. 5. Introduce a topic and group related information together; include illustrations when useful to aid comprehension. 6. Develop a topic with facts, definitions, and details. 7. Conduct short research projects that build knowledge about a topic. 8. Determine the kinds of sources that will be helpful in answering compelling and supporting questions, taking into consideration the different opinions people have about how to answer the questions. 9. Communicate information through the use of technologies.
u531 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Recognize how members of a community rely on each other and interact to influence the development of their communities (Civic Engagement).
u532 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. How have people from the past from diverse groups, identities, and cultures lived together and interacted with each other? 2. What types of questions do people ask to learn about the past? 3. How has a region changed and yet remained the same over time?
u533 (x=54) Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers ask questions to guide their research into the past. 2. Historical thinkers analyze the interaction, patterns, and contributions of various cultures and groups in the past.
u534 (x=108) Third Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 42 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.33 | SS.3.2.1]
u538 SOCIAL STUDIES Third Grade, Standard 2. Geography
u539 Prepared Graduates: 3. Apply geographic representations and perspectives to analyze human movement, spatial patterns, systems, and the connections and relationships among them.
u540 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Use geographic tools to develop spatial thinking skills.
u542 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers use and interpret information from geographic tools to investigate geographic questions. 2. Geographic thinkers use geographic tools to answer questions about places and locations such as where to locate a business or park and how to landscape a yard. 3. Geographic thinkers develop the skills to organize and make connections such as reading a map and understanding where you are, where you want to go, and how to get to the destination. 4. Geographic thinkers use maps, satellite images, photographs, and other representations to explain relationships between the locations of places and regions and their environmental characteristics.
u543 (x=54) Students Can: a. Read and interpret information from geographic tools and formulate
u544 (x=68) geographic questions. b. Locate oceans and continents, major countries, bodies of water, mountains,
u545 (x=68) urban areas, the state of Colorado, and neighboring states on maps. c. Describe the natural and man-made features of a specific area on a map. d. Identify geography-based problems and examine the ways that people have
u546 (x=68) tried to solve them.
u548 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Articulate the most effective geographic tools to access information needed for developing spatial thinking (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u549 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Use information gained from illustrations such as maps and photographs, as well as the words in a text to demonstrate understanding of the text. For example: Where, when, why, and how key events occur. 2. Determine the kinds of sources that will be helpful in answering compelling and supporting questions, taking into consideration the different opinions people have about how to answer the questions. 3. Find information using technology.
u550 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. What questions do geographers ask? 2. How does the geography of where we live influence how we live? 3. How do physical features provide opportunities and challenges to regions?
u551 (x=108) Third Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 43 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.34 | SS.3.2.2]
u555 SOCIAL STUDIES Third Grade, Standard 2. Geography
u556 Prepared Graduates: 4. Examine the characteristics of places and regions, and the changing nature among geographic and human interactions.
u557 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Define the concept of region through an examination of similarities and differences in places and communities.
u559 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers analyze connections among places. 2. Geographic thinkers compare and contrast characteristics of regions when making decisions and choices such as where to send children to school, what part of town to live in, what type of climate suits personal needs, and what region of a country to visit. 3. Geographic thinkers can explain how natural and human-made catastrophic events in one place affect people living in other places.
u560 (x=54) Students Can: a. Observe and describe the physical, cultural, and human-made
u561 (x=68) characteristics of a local region. For example: The Eastern Plains, San Luis Valley, Pikes Peak, Northwest, Front Range, South Central, Southwest, and Western Slope. b. Identify the factors that make a region unique. For example: Cultural
u562 (x=68) diversity, industry and agriculture, and landforms. c. Give examples of places that are similar and different from a local region. d. Characterize regions using different types of features such as physical,
u563 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Use information gained from illustrations such as maps and photographs, as well as the words in a text to demonstrate understanding of the text. For example: Where, when, why, and how key events occur. 2. Compare and contrast the most important points and key details presented in two texts on the same topic. 3. Identify disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a compelling question that are open to different interpretations. 4. Find information using technology.
u564 (x=68) political, cultural, urban, and rural attributes.
u566 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Investigate a variety of places and communities and draw conclusions about regions (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u567 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. Are regions in the world more similar or different? 2. Why do people describe regions using human or physical characteristics? 3. What are the geographic characteristics of a region? 4. How do cultures lead to similarities and differences between regions?
u568 (x=108) Third Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 44 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.35 | SS.3.3.1]
u572 SOCIAL STUDIES Third Grade, Standard 3. Economics
u573 Prepared Graduates: 5. Evaluate how scarce resources are allocated in societies through the analysis of individual choice, market interaction, and public policy.
u574 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Explain how producers and consumers exchange goods and services in different ways.
u576 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Economics: 1. Economic thinkers analyze trade and the use of money. 2. Economic thinkers describe and study the importance of exchange in a community. 3. Economic thinkers understand that goods and services are exchanged in multiple ways and are a part of everyday life such as purchasing or trading items. 4. Economic thinkers realize that production, consumption, and the exchange of goods and services are interconnected in the world. For example: Vegetables from California are sold at Colorado markets, and an ice storm in Florida affects orange juice supplies for the world. 5. Economic thinkers can explain why people voluntarily exchange goods and services when both parties expect to gain as a result of the trade. 6. Economic thinkers understand why people specialize and trade, and how that leads to increased economic interdependence in the world economy.
u577 (x=54) Students Can: a. Describe the difference between producers and consumers and explain how
u578 (x=68) they need each other. b. Describe and give examples of forms of exchange. For example: Monetary
u579 (x=68) exchange and barter. c. Describe how the exchange of goods and services between businesses and
u580 (x=68) consumers affects all parties. d. Recognize that different currencies exist and explain the functions of
u581 (x=68) money. For example: Medium of exchange, store of value, and measure of value. e. Cite evidence to show how trade benefits individuals, businesses, and
u582 (x=68) communities, and increases interdependency.
u584 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Recognize how members of a community rely on each other through exchanging goods and services, considering personal exchange behaviors (Civic Engagement). 2. Identify and explain the perspectives of all parties participating in an exchange (Global and Cultural Awareness).
u585 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Describe the relationship between a series of historical events, scientific ideas or concepts, or steps in technical procedures in a text, using language that pertains to time, sequence, and cause/effect. 2. Report on a topic or text, tell a story, or recount an experience with appropriate facts and relevant, descriptive details, speaking clearly at an understandable pace. 3. Begin to identify differing perspectives. 4. Explain the role of money in making exchange easier. 5. Identify examples of the variety of resources that are used to produce goods and services. For example: Human capital, physical capital, and natural resources.
u586 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. What would happen if consumers did not want what a producer made? 2. What would the world look like if there was no transportation that could move goods more than 50 miles?
u587 (x=108) Third Grade, Standard 3. Economics
=== page 45 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.36 | SS.3.4.1]
u591 SOCIAL STUDIES Third Grade, Standard 4. Civics
u592 Prepared Graduates: 6. Express an understanding of how civic participation affects policy by applying the rights and responsibilities of a citizen.
u593 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Respect the views and rights of others.
u595 Students Can: a. Identify and apply the elements of civil discourse. For example: Listening with respect, speaking in a respectful manner, and restating an opposing viewpoint or
u596 opinion. b. Identify important personal rights in a democratic society and how they relate to others’ rights. c. Give examples of the relationship between rights and responsibilities. d. Restate the view or opinion of others with their reasoning when it is different from one’s own.
u598 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Appropriately express one’s own emotions, thoughts, and values and identify how they influence behavior (Self-Awareness). 2. Regulate reactions to differing perspectives (Adaptability and Flexibility). 3. Identify and explain a different perspective when exploring events or ideas (Global and Cultural Awareness). 4. State a position and reflect on possible objections to assumptions and implications of the position (Self-Advocacy and Initiative).
u599 Inquiry Questions: 1. What are the essential elements of compromise that enable conflict to be transformed into agreement? 2. Why is personal advocacy important in a community with diverse views? 3. What would a community be like if individuals from various groups did not respect each other’s rights and views? 4. How can community members ensure that all voices and opinions, including those from African American, Latino, Asian American, Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, Indigenous Peoples, LGBTQ, and religious minorities groups, are heard?
u600 Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals take the opportunity to make positive changes in their community. 2. Civic-minded individuals recognize the value of respecting the rights and views of others. 3. Civic-minded individuals understand that a respect for the views of others helps to learn and understand various perspectives, thoughts, and cultures. For example: Environmentalists, industry, and government work together to solve issues around energy and other resources. 4. Civic-minded individuals understand that virtues, such as honesty, mutual respect, cooperation, and attentiveness to multiple perspectives, should be used when they interact with each other on public matters.
u601 (x=108) Third Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 46 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.37]
u605 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Distinguish their own point of view from that of the author of a text. 2. Demonstrate positive social and ethical behaviors when using technology and discuss consequences of inappropriate use. 3. Use technology resources for problem solving, communication, and illustration of thoughts and ideas. 4. Provide opportunities to use technology to research multiple views on issues to better understand the evolution of rights. For example: Lawyers research court findings and individuals engage in civic discourse regarding issues of the day through the internet. 5. Gather relevant information from multiple sources while using the origin, structure, and context to guide the selection. 6. Present a summary of arguments and explanations to others outside the classroom using print and oral technologies.
u606 (x=108) Third Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 47 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.38 | SS.3.4.2]
u609 SOCIAL STUDIES Third Grade, Standard 4. Civics
u610 Prepared Graduates: 7. Analyze the origins, structures, and functions of governments to evaluate the impact on citizens and the global society.
u611 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Describe the origins, structures, and functions of local government.
u613 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals are involved in their local government. 2. Civic-minded individuals know how personal advocacy and involvement can lead to change in communities. 3. Civic-minded individuals have a knowledge of the origins, structures, and functions of local government which enables participation in the democratic process. For example: Groups and governments work together to create a safe environment in the community. 4. Civic-minded individuals understand the important institutions of their society and the principles that these institutions are intended to reflect. 5. Civic-minded individuals use a range of deliberative and democratic procedures to make decisions about and act on civic problems in their classrooms and schools.
u614 (x=54) Students Can: a. Explain the origins and structures of local government. b. Explain the services local governments provide and how those services are
u615 (x=68) funded. c. Identify and explain a variety of roles leaders, citizens, and others play in
u616 (x=68) local government. d. Describe how local government provides opportunities for people to
u617 (x=68) exercise their rights and initiate change. e. Discuss the role of elections in choosing specific candidates to represent the
u618 (x=68) public interest in local government.
u620 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Connect knowledge from personal experiences in schools and communities to civic engagement (Civic Engagement).
u621 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Write informative/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey ideas and information clearly. 2. Gather relevant information from multiple sources while using the origin, structure, and context to guide the selection. 3. Identify the main idea and sequence of events in a social studies context. 4. Present information orally and in writing.
u622 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. How are local governments and citizens interdependent? 2. How do individuals get involved in their local government? 3. How do local governments and citizens help each other? 4. Why do people create governments? 5. How do people, places, and events help us understand the ideals of democratic government? 6. Why is it important to vote?
u623 (x=108) Third Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 48 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.39 | SS.3.5.1]
u627 SOCIAL STUDIES Third Grade, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u628 Prepared Graduates: 8. Apply economic reasoning skills to make informed personal financial decisions.
u629 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Create a plan to meet a financial goal.
u631 (x=414) Inquiry Questions: 1. What would happen if an individual spent all earnings on entertainment? 2. Why do individuals give away money? 3. Why is personal financial goal setting important? 4. How does an individual know when a good short-term goal is well-written?
u632 (x=54) Students Can: a. Give examples of short-term spending and savings goals. b. Identify activities that individuals can do to earn money to reach personal
u633 (x=68) financial goals. c. Differentiate the role of income and expenses when creating a budget. d. Create a plan with specific steps to reach a short-term financial goal. e. Model strategies to achieve a personal financial goal using arithmetic
u634 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Economics (PFL): 1. Financially capable individuals create goals and work toward meeting them. 2. Financially capable individuals understand the cost and the accountability associated with borrowing. 3. Financially capable individuals understand that personal financial goal setting is a lifelong activity and short-term goal setting is essential to that process. For example: Saving for a fish aquarium or skateboard. 4. Financially capable individuals understand that an analysis of various options for borrowing and creating short- and long-term goals is a lifelong skill.
u635 (x=68) operations.
u637 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Use a variety of strategies to achieve a financial goal, such as buying a new toy (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Demonstrate flexibility, imagination, and inventiveness in taking on tasks and activities that will help reach a financial goal (Creativity and Innovation). 3. Set goals and develop strategies to remain focused on learning and reaching financial goals (Perseverance and Resilience). 4. Recognize how members of a community rely on each other, considering personal contributions as applicable, when creating and completing a plan to reach a financial goal (Collaboration and Teamwork). 5. Demonstrate an understanding of cause and effect related to personal decisions they make regarding reaching a financial goal (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 6. Articulate task requirements and identify deadlines when developing a plan to meet a financial goal (Self-Management).
u638 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Compare the benefits and costs of individual choices. 2. Identify positive and negative incentives that influence the decisions people make. 3. Analyze different texts (including experiments, simulations, video, or multimedia texts) to compare competing theories, points of view, and arguments in the discipline.
u639 (x=108) Third Grade, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
=== page 49 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.40 | SS.4.1.1]
u643 SOCIAL STUDIES Fourth Grade, Standard 1. History
u644 Prepared Graduates: 1. Apply the process of inquiry to examine and analyze how historical knowledge is viewed, constructed, and interpreted.
u645 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Analyze primary and secondary sources from multiple points of view to develop an understanding of the history of Colorado.
u647 Students Can: a. Draw inferences about Colorado history from primary sources such as journals, diaries, maps, treaties, oral histories, etc. b. Identify cause-and-effect relationships using primary sources to understand the history of Colorado’s development. c. Explain, through multiple perspectives, the human interactions among people and cultures that are indigenous to or migrated to present-day Colorado. Including
u648 but not limited to: historic tribes of Colorado, the Ute Mountain Ute, Southern Ute, Spanish explorers, trappers, and traders. d. Identify and describe how political and cultural groups have affected the development of the region. Including but not limited to: African American, Latino, Asian
u649 American, Indigenous Peoples, religious groups, and European settlers. e. Discuss the multiple perspectives of settler colonialism/Westward Expansion and the impact on the political and cultural landscape of the region presently known as
u650 Colorado.
u652 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Identify and explain the perspectives of the various groups important in Colorado history when exploring the development of the state. For example: African American, Latino, Asian American, Indigenous Peoples, LGBTQ, religious groups, working class, and labor unions (Global and Cultural Awareness). 2. Recognize and describe cause-and-effect relationships in the history of Colorado (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u653 Inquiry Questions: 1. How have past events influenced present-day Colorado and the Rocky Mountain region? 2. Why is it important to know the sequence of events and people in Colorado history? 3. How can primary sources help us learn about the past or create more questions about our state’s history? 4. What social and economic decisions caused people to locate or relocate in various regions of Colorado? 5. What factors caused the displacement of Indigenous Peoples in the region now known as Colorado? 6. How does one’s perspective influence the words we use when studying events in history? For example: Settler colonialism and Westward Expansion?
u654 (x=108) Fourth Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 50 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.41]
u658 Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers seek accounts of history from multiple perspectives and from multiple sources. 2. Historical thinkers analyze patterns and themes throughout time. 3. Historical thinkers use primary sources as references for research. 4. Historical thinkers recognize important events in Colorado and can put them in chronological order to understand cause and effect such as the interactions of Indigenous Peoples defending their homelands/way of life from settler colonialism/Westward Expansion; discovery of gold and the Gold Rush; the growth of cities and towns and the development of law; the development of the state Constitution; and prohibition of slavery. 5. Historical thinkers can explain why individuals and groups during the same historical period differed in their perspectives.
u659 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Compare and contrast a firsthand and secondhand account of the same event or topic; describe the differences in focus and the information provided. 2. Write informative/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey ideas and information clearly. 3. Develop the topic with facts, definitions, concrete details, quotations, or other information and examples related to the topic. 4. Use precise language and domain-specific vocabulary to inform about or explain the topic. 5. Draw evidence from literary or informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and research. 6. Determine the kinds of sources that will be helpful in answering compelling and supporting questions, taking into consideration the different opinions people have about how to answer the questions. 7. Begin to discuss historical perspectives. 8. Communicate information through the use of technologies. 9. Articulate the most effective options to access information needed for a specific purpose. 10. Find information using technology.
u660 (x=108) Fourth Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 51 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.42 | SS.4.1.2]
u663 SOCIAL STUDIES Fourth Grade, Standard 1. History
u664 Prepared Graduates: 2. Analyze historical time periods and patterns of continuity and change, through multiple perspectives, within and among cultures and societies.
u665 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Describe the historical eras, individuals, groups, ideas, and themes in Colorado history and their relationship to key events in the United States within the same historical period.
u667 Students Can: a. Construct a timeline of the major events in Colorado history. b. Explain the relationship between major events in Colorado history and events in United States history during the same era. Including but not limited to: Colorado
u668 statehood, the Ludlow and Sand Creek Massacres, creation of national parks in Colorado, the Great Depression, the Dust Bowl, Amaché, Chicano movement, and busing in Denver. c. Describe both past and present interactions among the people and cultures in Colorado. For example: African Americans, Latinos, Asian Americans, Indigenous
u669 Peoples, LGBTQ, and religious groups. d. Describe the impact of various technological developments. For example: Changes in mining technologies, agricultural technology (center pivot irrigation),
u670 transportation, early 20th century industrial developments, and 20th century nuclear and computer technologies.
u672 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Recognize and describe cause-and-effect relationships within Colorado history and draw conclusions about how various events and people affected the development of the state (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u673 Inquiry Questions: 1. In what ways have geographic, economic, cultural, and technological changes influenced Colorado today? 2. Why did people of various cultural groups such as African Americans, Latinos, Asian Americans, Indigenous Peoples, and religious minorities migrate to and settle in Colorado? 3. To what extent has unity, diversity, and discord shaped Colorado? 4. How have various individuals, groups, and ideas affected the development of Colorado? 5. What happened to early African American communities such as Dearfield, Lincoln Hills, or Five Points in Denver?
u674 (x=108) Fourth Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 52 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.43]
u678 Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers analyze patterns and themes across time periods. 2. Historical thinkers use context and information from the past to make connections and inform current decisions. For example: Colorado has had a history of boom- and-bust cycles that have influenced the decisions of city and state planners. 3. Historical thinkers realize that technological developments continue to evolve and affect the present. For example: Environmental issues have had an impact on Colorado from the Gold Rush to modern pollution. 4. Historical thinkers compare life in specific historical time periods to life today. 5. Historical thinkers generate questions about individuals and groups who have shaped significant historical changes and continuities. 6. Historical thinkers construct explanations using reasoning, correct sequence, examples, and details with relevant information and data.
u679 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Introduce a topic or text clearly, state an opinion, and create an organizational structure in which related ideas are grouped to support the writer’s purpose. 2. Write informative/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey ideas and information clearly. 3. Use precise language and domain-specific vocabulary to inform about or explain the topic. 4. Conduct short research projects that build knowledge through investigation of different aspects of a topic. 5. Draw evidence from literary or informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and research. 6. Determine the kinds of sources that will be helpful in answering compelling and supporting questions, taking into consideration the different opinions people have about how to answer the questions. 7. Articulate the most effective options to access information needed for a specific purpose. 8. Find information using technology.
u680 (x=108) Fourth Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 53 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.44 | SS.4.2.1]
u683 SOCIAL STUDIES Fourth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
u684 Prepared Graduates: 3. Apply geographic representations and perspectives to analyze human movement, spatial patterns, systems, and the connections and relationships among them.
u685 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Use geographic tools to research and answer questions about Colorado geography.
u687 Students Can: a. Answer questions about Colorado regions using maps and other geographic tools. b. Use geographic grids, including latitude and longitude, to locate places and answer questions about maps and images of Colorado. c. Create and investigate geographic questions about Colorado in relation to other places. d. Illustrate, using geographic tools, how places in Colorado have changed and developed over time due to human activity. e. Describe similarities and differences between the physical geography of Colorado and its neighboring states.
u689 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Articulate the most effective tools to access information about the geography of Colorado (Media Literacy). 2. Ask questions to develop further understanding about the geography and development of Colorado (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u690 Inquiry Questions: 1. Which geographic tools are best to locate information about a place? 2. Why did settlements and large cities develop where they did in Colorado? 3. How are the regions of Colorado defined by geography? 4. How does the physical location of Colorado affect its relationship with other regions of the United States and the world?
u691 Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers gather appropriate tools to formulate and answer questions related to space and place. 2. Geographic thinkers use tools to compare and contrast geographic locations. 3. Geographic thinkers use geographic tools to answer questions about the state and region to make informed choices. For example: A family reads a weather map to research road conditions to inform their decision to go to the mountains in the winter. 4. Geographic thinkers use geographic tools to collect and analyze data regarding an area where people live. 5. Geographic thinkers identify evidence that draws information from multiple sources in response to compelling questions. 6. Geographic thinkers use evidence to develop claims in response to compelling questions.
u692 (x=108) Fourth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 54 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.45]
u696 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Integrate information from two texts on the same topic in order to write or speak about the subject knowledgeably. 2. Introduce a topic or text clearly, state an opinion, and create an organizational structure in which related ideas are grouped to support the writer’s purpose. 3. Develop the topic with facts, definitions, concrete details, quotations, or other information and examples related to the topic. 4. Provide a concluding statement or section related to the information or explanation presented. 5. Identify disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a compelling question that are open to different interpretations. 6. Access relevant information needed for a specific purpose. 7. Find and communicate information using technology.
u697 (x=108) Fourth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 55 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.46 | SS.4.2.2]
u700 SOCIAL STUDIES Fourth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
u701 Prepared Graduates: 4. Examine the characteristics of places and regions, and the changing nature among geographic and human interactions.
u702 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Examine the relationship between the physical environment and its effect on human activity.
u704 Students Can: a. Describe how the physical environment provides opportunities for and places constraints on human activities. b. Explain how physical environments influence immigration into the state. c. Analyze how people use geographic factors in creating settlements and have adapted to and modified the local physical environment. d. Describe how places in Colorado are connected by movement of goods, services, and technology.
u706 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Define the problems faced by people in Colorado because of the physical environment they encountered (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u707 Inquiry Questions: 1. What physical characteristics led various cultural groups to select the places they did for settlement in Colorado? 2. How did Colorado settlers alter their environment to facilitate communication and transportation? 3. How does the physical environment affect human activity? 4. How does human activity affect the environment?
u708 Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers use maps, satellite images, photographs, and other representations to explain relationships between the locations of places and regions and their environmental characteristics. 2. Geographic thinkers evaluate how physical features affect the development of a sense of place. 3. Geographic thinkers consider geographic factors when making settlement decisions. For example: Colorado Springs has a dry climate that is favorable for computer companies, and ski resorts developed in the Rocky Mountains. 4. Geographic thinkers can describe how environmental and cultural characteristics influence population distribution in specific places or regions in Colorado. 5. Geographic thinkers explain how cultural and environmental characteristics affect the distribution and movement of people, goods, and ideas. 6. Geographic thinkers explain how human settlements and movements relate to the locations and use of various natural resources.
u709 (x=108) Fourth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 56 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.47]
u713 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Compare and contrast a firsthand and secondhand account of the same event or topic; describe the differences in focus and the information provided. 2. Integrate information from two texts on the same topic in order to write or speak about the subject knowledgeably. 3. Write informative/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey ideas and information clearly. 4. Introduce a topic clearly and group-related information in paragraphs and sections; include formatting (e.g., headings), illustrations, and multimedia when useful in aiding comprehension. 5. Identify disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a compelling question that are open to different interpretations. 6. Explain how supporting questions help answer compelling questions in an inquiry. 7. Articulate the most effective options to access information needed for a specific purpose. 8. Find information using technology. 9. Communicate information using technology.
u714 (x=108) Fourth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 57 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.48 | SS.4.3.1]
u717 SOCIAL STUDIES Fourth Grade, Standard 3. Economics
u718 Prepared Graduates: 5. Evaluate how scarce resources are allocated in societies through the analysis of individual choice, market interaction, and public policy.
u719 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Explain how people respond to positive and negative incentives.
u721 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Economics: 1. Economic thinkers study positive incentives and how they influence behavior predictably over time. For example: Responsible individuals save for the future and move for better job opportunities. 2. Economic thinkers study how negative incentives influence behavior predictably over time. For example: People move or refuse to relocate due to poor climate or resource shortages. 3. Economic thinkers investigate alternative ways to use the resources in terms of their advantages and disadvantages. 4. Economic thinkers use both positive and negative incentives to affect behavior. For example: The tourism industry uses incentives to attract tourists and government agencies use tickets to discourage speeding and fines for not following regulations.
u722 (x=54) Students Can: a. Define positive and negative economic incentives and describe how people
u723 (x=68) typically respond to those incentives. b. In a given situation, create a plan of appropriate incentives to achieve a
u724 (x=68) desired result. For example: Offering a prize to the person who picks up the most trash on the playground. c. Give examples of the kinds of goods and services produced in Colorado, in
u725 (x=68) different historical periods, and their connection to economic incentives. d. Explain how productive resources (natural, human, and capital) have
u726 (x=68) influenced the types of goods produced and services provided in Colorado.
u728 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Set goals and develop strategies which take into account positive and negative incentives in order to remain focused on learning goals (Perseverance and Resilience).
u729 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Draw evidence from literary or informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and research. 2. Identify disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a compelling question that are open to different interpretations. 3. Identify the main idea, sequence of events, and cause and effect in a social studies context. 4. Present information orally and in writing.
u730 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. Why are different goods and services important at different times in Colorado’s history? 2. How have science and technology changed the economy of Colorado? 3. How have natural, human, and capital resources had both positive and negative impacts on the development of Colorado? 4. How can you explain why people or communities make the decisions that they do?
u731 (x=108) Fourth Grade, Standard 3. Economics
=== page 58 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.49 | SS.4.4.1]
u735 SOCIAL STUDIES Fourth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
u736 Prepared Graduates: 6. Express an understanding of how civic participation affects policy by applying the rights and responsibilities of a citizen.
u737 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Investigate multiple perspectives on civic issues.
u739 Students Can: a. Give examples of issues faced by the state of Colorado and develop possible solutions. b. Provide supportive arguments for both sides of a current public policy debate involving diverse stakeholders. c. Discuss how various individuals and groups influence the way an issue affecting the state is viewed and resolved. Including but not limited to the contributions of
u740 African Americans, Latinos, Japanese Americans, Indigenous Peoples, LGBTQ, and religious groups. d. Identify and use appropriate sources to investigate and analyze issues from multiple diverse perspectives.
u742 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Regulate reactions to differing perspectives (Adaptability and Flexibility). 2. Identify and explain multiple perspectives when exploring issues faced by the state of Colorado (Global and Cultural Awareness). 3. Participate in social or community activities (Civic Engagement).
u743 Inquiry Questions: 1. How do diverse opinions enrich a community? 2. How does an individual’s experience and background influence perception of an issue? 3. Why is it important for those who are most impacted by an issue to be involved in creating solutions? 4. Why is it important to research issues and engage in civil debates? 5. Why is it important that all voices are heard by local and state government officials? For example: Groups and individuals representing African Americans, Latinos, Asian Americans, Indigenous Peoples, LGBTQ, and religious groups?
u744 Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals understand that virtues, such as honesty, mutual respect, cooperation, and attentiveness to multiple perspectives, should be used when they interact with each other on public matters. 2. Civic-minded individuals recognize opportunities to study the effectiveness of various ways to influence state public policy. 3. Civic-minded individuals understand the relationship between state/tribal government and citizens. 4. Civic-minded individuals study the art of debate, critical reasoning, and active listening to foster informed choices. For example: School boards review the pros and cons of an issue such as dress codes and then make a policy decision.
u745 (x=108) Fourth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 59 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.50]
u749 5. Civic-minded individuals identify the beliefs, experiences, perspectives, and values that underlie their own and others’ points of view about civic issues. 6. Civic-minded individuals critique arguments and provide explanations.
u750 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Draw evidence from literary or informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and research. 2. Integrate information from two texts on the same topic in order to write or speak about the subject knowledgeably. 3. Identify disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a compelling question that are open to different interpretations. 4. Determine the kinds of sources that will be helpful in answering compelling and supporting questions, taking into consideration the different opinions people have about how to answer the questions. 5. Gather relevant information from multiple sources while using the origin, structure, and context to guide the selection. 6. Present information orally and in writing. 7. Use technology to access information efficiently and effectively. 8. Understanding the consequences of how and what one chooses to communicate.
u751 (x=108) Fourth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 60 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.51 | SS.4.4.2]
u754 SOCIAL STUDIES Fourth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
u755 Prepared Graduates: 7. Analyze the origins, structures, and functions of governments to evaluate the impact on citizens and the global society.
u756 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Describe the origins, structures, and functions of the Colorado government.
u758 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals understand the importance of the processes and rules by which groups of people make decisions, govern themselves, and address public problems. 2. Civic-minded individuals know the origins, structure, and functions of Colorado’s government and how it provides for participation, influence, and benefits. For example: Individuals can vote on ballot issues that affect taxes. 3. Civic-minded individuals investigate resources and ask for government support and services. For example: Someone wanting to open a restaurant can visit the Department of Health website to get information. 4. Civic-minded individuals can explain different strategies and approaches that students and others could take in working alone and together to address local, regional, and global problems, and predict possible results of their actions. For example: Citizens can volunteer to help with cultural celebrations at their local library to help others learn about and respect diverse cultures in their community.
u759 (x=54) Students Can: a. Explain the historical foundation and events that led to the Colorado
u760 (x=68) Constitution and the formation of the three branches of Colorado government. b. Identify and explain a variety of roles leaders, citizens, and others play in
u761 (x=68) state government. c. Identify and explain the services the state government provides and how
u762 (x=68) those services are funded. d. Describe how the decisions of the state government affect local
u763 (x=68) governments and interact with the federal government and sovereign indigenous nations. e. Describe how a citizen might engage in local and state government to
u764 (x=68) demonstrate their rights or initiate change.
u766 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Recognize how members of a community rely on each other to make decisions and enact change (Civic Engagement).
u767 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Write informative/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey ideas and information clearly. 2. Report on a topic or text, tell a story, or recount an experience in an organized manner, using appropriate facts and relevant, descriptive details to support main ideas or themes; speak clearly at an understandable pace. 3. Present information orally and in writing. 4. Use technology to access information efficiently and effectively. 5. Identifying how laws, rules, and policies need to evolve as society responds to technological advancements.
u768 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. What would state government look like if one branch had more power than the others? 2. What would Colorado be like without a state government? 3. To what extent were various individuals and organizations in the state important in the development of Colorado’s government?
u769 (x=108) Fourth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 61 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.52 | SS.4.5.1]
u773 SOCIAL STUDIES Fourth Grade, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u774 Prepared Graduates: 8. Apply economic reasoning skills to make informed personal financial decisions.
u775 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Determine the opportunity cost when making a choice.
u777 Students Can: a. Define choice and opportunity cost. b. Determine the relationship between long-term goals and opportunity cost. c. Analyze scenarios of choices including opportunity cost.
u779 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Make connections between information gathered and personal experiences to apply and/or test solutions when making a purchase (Self-Advocacy and Initiative). 2. Regulate one’s emotions, thoughts, and behaviors in different situations when making a purchase (Self-Management). 3. Ask questions to develop further personal understanding of how to make informed purchases (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u780 Inquiry Questions: 1. What different ways does an individual have to get information when deciding between purchase options? 2. How do you know when a good decision has been made about a purchase? 3. What outside influences (peer pressure) can affect spending decisions?
u781 Nature and Skills of Economics (PFL): 1. Financially capable individuals analyze opportunity costs associated with making decisions. 2. Financially capable individuals analyze data to forecast possible outcomes. 3. Financially capable individuals understand that the relationship between choice and opportunity cost leads to good decision-making. For example: A business may have an opportunity to purchase inexpensive land, but the cost may be in the travel time. 4. Financially capable individuals compare the benefits and costs of individual choices. 5. Financially capable individuals identify positive and negative incentives that influence the decisions people make.
u782 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Integrate information from two texts on the same topic in order to write or speak about the subject knowledgeably. 2. Use precise language and domain-specific vocabulary to inform about or explain the topic.
u783 (x=108) Fourth Grade, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
=== page 62 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.53 | SS.5.1.1]
u787 SOCIAL STUDIES Fifth Grade, Standard 1. History
u788 Prepared Graduates: 1. Apply the process of inquiry to examine and analyze how historical knowledge is viewed, constructed, and interpreted.
u789 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Analyze primary and secondary sources from multiple points of view to develop an understanding of early United States history.
u791 Students Can: a. Recognize how historical context can affect the perspective of historical sources. b. Examine significant historical documents. For example: The Proclamation of 1763, the Stamp Act, the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, and treaties
u792 with Indigenous Nations such as the Two Row Wampum Treaty. c. Interpret timelines of eras and themes in North America from early Indigenous Peoples through the European Age of Exploration/post-Columbian colonization and
u793 the establishment of the United States Government. d. Analyze cartoons, artifacts, artwork, charts, and graphs related to eras and themes in early North America.
u795 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Make observations and draw conclusions from a variety of sources when studying American history (Media Literacy). 2. Identify and explain multiple perspectives when exploring events, ideas, and issues in United States history (Global and Cultural Awareness).
u796 Inquiry Questions: 1. How do sources with varied perspectives help us to understand what happened in the past? 2. Why is important to understand the historical context of events? 3. How might history be different without the Declaration of Independence? 4. Why is it important to understand the perspectives of diverse groups involved in early United States history? For example: African Americans, Indigenous Peoples, and religious and immigrant groups.
u797 Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers analyze and interpret primary and secondary sources to make inferences about various time periods and show cause-and-effect relationships. 2. Historical thinkers seek people, places, and events that tell the story of history from multiple perspectives. 3. Historical thinkers examine data for point of view, historical context, distortion, or propaganda. 4. Historical thinkers apply the historical method of inquiry to continuously interpret and refine history. For example: Political cartoonists portray multiple perspectives of events, and newspapers may be biased in coverage of events throughout time. 5. Historical thinkers generate questions about individuals and groups who have shaped significant historical changes and continuities. 6. Historical thinkers explain why individuals and groups during the same historical period differed in their perspectives.
u798 (x=108) Fifth Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 63 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.54]
u802 7. Historical thinkers explain connections among historical contexts and people’s perspectives at the time. 8. Historical thinkers summarize how different kinds of historical sources are used to explain events in the past. 9. Historical thinkers gather relevant information from multiple sources while using the origin, structure, and context to guide the selection. 10. Historical thinkers use evidence to develop claims in response to compelling questions.
u803 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Analyze multiple accounts of the same event or topic, noting important similarities and differences in the point of view they represent. 2. Integrate information from several texts on the same topic in order to write or speak about the subject knowledgeably. 3. Provide logically ordered reasons that are supported by facts and details. 4. Write informative/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey ideas and information clearly. 5. Draw evidence from literary or informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and research. 6. Articulate the most effective options to access information needed for a specific purpose. 7. Communicate information using technology. 8. Understanding how rules for respecting others’ belongings apply to digital content and information privacy.
u804 (x=108) Fifth Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 64 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.55 | SS.5.1.2]
u807 SOCIAL STUDIES Fifth Grade, Standard 1. History
u808 Prepared Graduates: 2. Analyze historical time periods and patterns of continuity and change, through multiple perspectives, within and among cultures and societies.
u809 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Examine the historical eras, individuals, groups, ideas, and themes in North America from early Indigenous Peoples through the European Age of Exploration/post-Columbian colonization and the establishment of the United States Government.
u811 Students Can: a. Explain interactions among various groups such as Indigenous Peoples, enslaved individuals (both Indigenous and African), and European colonists. For example: The
u812 cultural genocide of Indigenous Peoples, chattel slavery of Africans, the League of the Iroquois, Spanish missions, and trade networks. b. Identify and describe the contributions of significant individuals and groups of Indigenous Peoples, enslaved individuals, and European colonists through the
u813 American Revolution. For example: Crispus Attucks, Sybil Luddington, Benjamin Banneker, Thomas Jefferson, and Patrick Henry. c. Describe the political, social, and economic reasons for the settlement of the European and American colonies and how it affected Indigenous Peoples and enslaved
u814 Africans. d. Analyze important political, social, economic, and military developments leading to and during the American Revolution. e. Investigate causes and effects of significant events in early United States history. For example: The establishment of Jamestown, George Washington’s crossing of
u815 the Delaware River, the French and Indian War, and the Constitutional Convention.
u817 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Identify and explain multiple perspectives including African Americans, Indigenous Peoples, Latinos, Asian Americans, Hawaiian/Pacific Islanders, LGBTQ, and religious groups when exploring events, ideas, issues in United States history (Global and Cultural Awareness).
u818 Inquiry Questions: 1. How did historical events and individuals contribute to diversity in the United States? 2. How did beliefs and values shape the founding documents? 3. To what extent did individuals and their ideas contribute to the establishment of the United States government? 4. Whose voices were left out of the process of establishing the United States government? How have omissions in the historical record shaped our perception of history? 5. Why is it important to understand the perspective of multiple diverse groups involved in early United States history? 6. How did European colonization affect Indigenous and enslaved African populations?
u819 (x=108) Fifth Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 65 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.56]
u823 Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers use chronology to organize and study cause-and-effect relationships across time. 2. Historical thinkers study people, places, and events to tell the story of history from multiple diverse perspectives. 3. Historical thinkers examine the context and information from the past to make connections and inform decisions in the present. For example: The concept of liberty continues to be defended by lawyers and citizens; and the rights and responsibilities of citizens continue to evolve through the work of policy makers, legislators, judges, lawyers, and individuals 4. Historical thinkers generate questions about individuals and groups who have shaped significant historical changes and continuities. 5. Historical thinkers explain connections among historical contexts and people’s perspectives at the time. 6. Historical thinkers summarize how different kinds of historical sources are used to explain events in the past. 7. Historical thinkers use evidence to develop a claim about the past. 8. Historical thinkers construct explanations using reasoning, correct sequence, examples, and details with relevant information and data.
u824 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Integrate information from several texts on the same topic in order to write or speak about the subject knowledgeably. 2. Write informative/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey ideas and information clearly. 3. Introduce a topic clearly, provide a general observation and focus, and group related information logically; include formatting (e.g., headings), illustrations, and multimedia when useful to aiding comprehension. 4. Use precise language and domain-specific vocabulary to inform about or explain the topic. 5. Conduct short research projects that use several sources to build knowledge through investigation of different aspects of a topic. 6. Report on a topic or text or present an opinion, sequencing ideas logically and using appropriate facts and relevant, descriptive details to support main ideas or themes; speak clearly at an understandable pace. 7. Communicate information using technology.
u825 (x=108) Fifth Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 66 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.57 | SS.5.2.1]
u828 SOCIAL STUDIES Fifth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
u829 Prepared Graduates: 3. Apply geographic representations and perspectives to analyze human movement, spatial patterns, systems, and the connections and relationships among them.
u830 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Use geographic tools and sources to research and answer questions about United States geography.
u832 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers use geographic tools to evaluate data in order to answer geographic questions. 2. Geographic thinkers locate places and identify resources, physical features, regions, and populations using geographic tools. 3. Geographic thinkers use geographic technologies to enhance the ability to locate and analyze maps to answer questions. For example: Historians use maps to help recreate settings of historical events, and individuals use maps to learn about different geographic areas.
u833 (x=54) Students Can: a. Answer questions about regions of North America and the United States
u834 (x=68) using various types of maps. b. Use geographic tools to identify, locate, and describe places and regions in
u835 (x=68) North America and the United States and suggest reasons for their location. c. Describe the influence of accessible resources on the development of local
u836 (x=68) and regional communities throughout North America and the United States.
u838 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Analyze multiple accounts of the same event or topic, noting important similarities and differences in the point of view they represent. 2. Use precise language and domain-specific vocabulary to inform about or explain the topic. 3. Conduct short research projects that use several sources to build knowledge through investigation of different aspects of a topic. 4. Report on a topic or text or present an opinion, sequencing ideas logically and using appropriate facts and relevant, descriptive details to support main ideas or themes; speak clearly at an understandable pace.
u839 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Investigate geographic resources to form hypotheses, make observations, and draw conclusions about communities in the United States (Global and Cultural Awareness).
u840 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. How can various types of maps and other geographic tools communicate geographic information incorrectly? 2. How do you think differently about data when it is displayed spatially? 3. How and why do we label places? 4. How have places and regions in the United States been influenced by the physical geography of North America over time?
u841 (x=108) Fifth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 67 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.58 | SS.5.2.2]
u845 SOCIAL STUDIES Fifth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
u846 Prepared Graduates: 4. Examine the characteristics of places and regions, and the changing nature among geographic and human interactions.
u847 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Examine causes and consequences of movement.
u849 Students Can: a. Identify variables associated with discovery, exploration, and migration. b. Explain migration, trade, and cultural patterns that result from interactions among people, groups, and cultures. c. Describe and analyze how specific physical and political features influenced historical events, movements, and adaptation to the environment. d. Analyze how cooperation and conflict among diverse groups of people contribute(d) to political, economic, and social divisions in the United States. e. Give examples of the influence of geography on the history of the United States.
u851 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Consider purpose, formality of context and audience, and distinct cultural norms when planning the content, mode, delivery, and expression of analysis of historical events and movements (Interpersonal Communication). 2. Identify and explain multiple perspectives when exploring ideas about conflict in the United States (Global and Cultural Awareness).
u852 Inquiry Questions: 1. What human and physical characteristics have motivated, prevented, or impeded migration and immigration over time? 2. How can migration and immigration, voluntary and involuntary, be represented geographically? 3. How has the movement of people and their belongings affected the environment both positively and negatively?
u853 Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers study patterns of human movement. 2. Geographic thinkers understand how technology has influenced movement to, colonization of, and the settlement of North America. 3. Geographic thinkers examine how the migration of individuals affects society including economic and environmental impacts.
u854 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Draw evidence from geographic tools or informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and research. 2. Determine the kinds of sources that will be helpful in answering compelling and supporting questions, taking into consideration the different opinions people have about how to answer the questions.
u855 (x=108) Fifth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 68 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.59 | SS.5.3.1]
u859 SOCIAL STUDIES Fifth Grade, Standard 3. Economics
u860 Prepared Graduates: 5. Evaluate how scarce resources are allocated in societies through the analysis of individual choice, market interaction, and public policy.
u861 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Explain how patterns of trade shaped the development of Early America.
u863 (x=414) 2. Economic thinkers describe and study the importance of exchange in a community. 3. Economic thinkers understand the actions of financial institutions in a market economy. 4. Economic thinkers make decisions about how to use scarce resources to maximize the well-being of individuals and society. 5. Economic thinkers voluntarily exchange goods and services when both parties expect to gain as a result of the trade. 6. Economic thinkers understand that the principles of markets apply to markets for goods and services, labor, credit, and foreign exchange. 7. Economic thinkers understand why people specialize and trade, and how that leads to increased economic interdependence in the world economy. 8. Economic thinkers gather information from a variety of sources and evaluate the relevance of that information when constructing opinions, explanations, or arguments.
u864 (x=54) Students Can: a. Identify examples of the productive resources and explain how they are
u865 (x=68) used to produce goods and services. For example: Land, labor, and capital. b. Compare ways in which people and communities exchanged goods and
u866 (x=68) services. For example: Barter and monetary exchange. c. Identify the goods and services that were traded among different cultures
u867 (x=68) and regions. d. Describe how patterns of trade evolved within Early America. e. Explain some of the challenges that American colonists faced that would
u868 (x=68) eventually lead them to the creation of commercial banks.
u870 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Investigate to form hypotheses, make observations, and draw conclusions about the development of the systems of exchange in the United States (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Recognize how members of a community rely on each other through trade and exchange (Civic Engagement).
u871 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Determine the kinds of sources that will be helpful in answering compelling and supporting questions, taking into consideration the different opinions people have about how to answer the questions. 2. Integrate information from several texts on the same topic in order to write or speak about the subject knowledgeably. 3. Draw evidence from literary or informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and research. 4. Identify cause and effect, and fact and opinion. 5. Conduct research by locating, gathering, and organizing information using online and print resources. 6. Explain content using maps, graphs, charts, and diagrams. 7. Use content specific technology tools to support learning.
u872 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. How did different cultures or communities in Early America interact with each other? 2. Why do people trade? 3. Why do most modern societies choose to use money? 4. How are financial institutions important to society?
u873 (x=54) Nature and Skills of Economics: 1. Economic thinkers analyze trade and the use of money.
u874 (x=108) Fifth Grade, Standard 3. Economics
=== page 69 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.60 | SS.5.4.1]
u878 SOCIAL STUDIES Fifth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
u879 Prepared Graduates: 6. Express an understanding of how civic participation affects policy by applying the rights and responsibilities of a citizen.
u880 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Construct an understanding of the foundations, rights, and responsibilities of citizenship in the United States.
u882 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals understand that civic virtues such as civility, cooperation, respect, and responsible participation are foundational components of our society. 2. Civic-minded individuals understand the significance of peaceful assembly by groups and respectful behavior during a performance or speech. 3. Civic-minded individuals understand that the foundations of citizenship in the United States ensure that citizens’ rights are being protected. For example: The rule of law applies to everyone in society and all individuals and groups are treated with respect. 4. Civic-minded individuals analyze historical documents to investigate the development of the national government. 5. Civic-minded individuals understand the responsibilities of the national government to its citizens. 6. Civic-minded individuals understand that in order to act responsibly and effectively, citizens must understand the important institutions of their society and the principles that these institutions are intended to reflect. 7. Civic-minded individuals gather information from a variety of sources and evaluate the relevance of that information when constructing opinions, explanations, or arguments.
u883 (x=54) Students Can: a. Describe and explain examples of individual rights as a foundation of
u884 (x=68) citizenship. b. Give examples of group and individual actions that illustrate civic ideals in
u885 (x=68) the founding of the United States. For example: Freedom, rule of law, equality, civility, cooperation, respect, responsibility, and civic participation. c. Discuss how the concept of citizenship changed over time in the early
u886 (x=68) American colonies.
u888 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Recognize how members of a community rely on each other through a variety of ways when creating rules and norms (Collaboration and Teamwork). 2. Connect knowledge of the foundations of citizenship in the United States to personal ideas/understandings (Civic Engagement).
u889 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. Who is considered a citizen and why? 2. How has citizenship been decided over the course of U.S. history? 3. What is the most important right and responsibility of a citizen? 4. How does the government meet its responsibility to citizens? 5. What historical or current barriers to citizenship exist? 6. What barriers to citizenship have affected people including African Americans, Latinos, Asian Americans, Hawaiian/Pacific Islanders, Indigenous Peoples, LGBTQ, and religious minorities?
u890 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Integrate information from several texts on the same topic in order to write or speak about the subject knowledgeably. 2. Conduct research by locating, gathering, and organizing information using online and print resources.
u891 (x=108) Fifth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 70 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.61 | SS.5.4.2]
u895 SOCIAL STUDIES Fifth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
u896 Prepared Graduates: 7. Analyze the origins, structures, and functions of governments to evaluate the impact on citizens and the global society.
u897 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Investigate the origins, structures, and functions of the United States government.
u899 Students Can: a. Explain the foundational documents and significance of the events that led to the establishment of the United States government. Including but not limited to the
u900 Philadelphia Convention, the Declaration of Independence, the Articles of Confederation, the Iroquois Confederacy, the Constitution, and the Bill of Rights. b. Identify political principles of American democracy and how the Constitution and Bill of Rights reflect and preserve these principles. c. Explain the origins, structures, and functions of the three branches of the United States government and the relationships among them. d. Describe how the Constitution balances the power of national and state governments.
u902 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Identify and explain multiple perspectives when exploring the events leading to the creation of the United States government and the principles of American democracy (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u903 Inquiry Questions: 1. What are democratic ideals and practices and their historic origins? 2. Were the Founding Fathers correct in keeping the Constitution open for flexibility and interpretation? 3. How have historical documents defined and distributed power? 4. How has the Constitution been amended beginning with the Bill of Rights and since 1787? 5. How does a living document, such as the U.S. Constitution, benefit American democracy over time?
u904 Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals understand the concept of individual rights as a cornerstone to American democracy. 2. Civic-minded individuals understand the relationships between individual rights and personal responsibility. 3. Civic-minded individuals know that the origins, structure, and function of the United States government are studied to create an informed, civically literate, and responsible society. For example: Fundamental principles and liberties are still evolving as judges interpret the Constitution, and legislators make laws and local city councils, and boards create regulations. 4. Civic-minded individuals understand that in order to act responsibly and effectively, citizens must understand the important institutions of their society and the principles that these institutions are intended to reflect.
u905 (x=108) Fifth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 71 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.62]
u909 5. Civic-minded individuals understand that civics teaches the principles—such as adherence to the social contract, consent of the governed, limited government, legitimate authority, federalism, and separation of powers—that are meant to guide official institutions such as legislatures, courts, and government agencies.
u910 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Integrate information from several texts on the same topic in order to write or speak about the subject knowledgeably. 2. Write informative/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey ideas and information clearly. 3. Determine the kinds of sources that will be helpful in answering compelling and supporting questions, taking into consideration the different opinions people have about how to answer the questions. 4. Identify and discuss primary and secondary sources.
u911 (x=108) Fifth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 72 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.63 | SS.5.5.1]
u914 SOCIAL STUDIES Fifth Grade, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u915 Prepared Graduates: 8. Apply economic reasoning skills to make informed personal financial decisions.
u916 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Examine how individuals use financial institutions to manage personal finances.
u918 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Economics (PFL): 1. Financially capable individuals research, analyze, and make choices regarding their needs when using financial institutions. 2. Financially capable individuals identify positive and negative incentives that influence the decisions people make. 3. Financially capable individuals use technology to track and graph the interest accrued on “virtual” investments, checking and savings accounts, investments, and loans.
u919 (x=54) Students Can: a. Differentiate between saving and investing. b. Establish the function of banking. c. Distinguish between different types of financial institutions such as banks
u920 (x=68) and credit unions, and the services provided. For example: Checking accounts, savings accounts, investments, and loans. d. Create a way to keep track of money spent and money saved.
u921 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Write informative/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey ideas and information clearly. 2. Conduct short research projects that use several sources to build knowledge through investigation of different aspects of a topic. 3. Understand how rules for respecting others’ belongings apply to digital content and information privacy.
u923 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Make connections between information gathered and personal experiences to apply and/or test solutions when choosing a financial institution or financial product (Adaptability and Flexibility). 2. Express one’s own emotions, thoughts, and values and identify how they influence behavior when making decisions regarding choosing a financial institution or financial product (Self-Awareness). 3. Ask questions to develop further personal understanding when choosing financial institutions and financial products (Self-Advocacy and Initiative).
u924 Inquiry Questions: 1. What risks and benefits are associated with spending versus saving and investing? 2. What factors influence choices to save or invest? 3. How can a checking account help to decide how to spend and save? 4. Why do people use financial institutions rather than self-banking? 5. How do people choose a financial institution? 6. What are the risks and benefits of different financial institutions?
u925 (x=108) Fifth Grade, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
=== page 73 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.64 | SS.6.1.1]
u929 SOCIAL STUDIES Sixth Grade, Standard 1. History
u930 Prepared Graduates: 1. Apply the process of inquiry to examine and analyze how historical knowledge is viewed, constructed, and interpreted.
u931 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Analyze and interpret primary and secondary sources to ask and research historical questions about the Western Hemisphere (including North America, South America, Central America, and the islands of the Caribbean).
u933 Students Can: a. Identify ways different cultures record history in the Western Hemisphere through written and oral sources. b. Analyze multiple primary and secondary sources while formulating historical questions about the Western Hemisphere. For example: Oral histories, art, artifacts,
u934 eyewitness accounts, letters, and diaries, real or simulated historical sites, charts, graphs, diagrams, and written texts. c. Gather, organize, synthesize, and critique information, from multiple and diverse perspectives, to determine if it is sufficient to answer historical questions about
u935 the Western Hemisphere. For example: Indigenous People, Latinos, African Americans, Asian Americans, Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, LGBTQ, and religious minorities and differing opinions within such groups.
u937 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Make connections between information gathered and personal experiences to research historical questions (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Engage in novel approaches, moves, directions, ideas, and/or perspectives while using inquiry and primary sources (Creativity and Innovation). 3. Respect different perspectives expressed by others (Adaptability and Flexibility). 4. Utilize primary and secondary sources to examine how individuals interpret messages differently, how values and points of view are included or excluded, and how media can influence beliefs and behaviors (Media Literacy).
u938 Inquiry Questions: 1. What questions help us understand the development of the Western Hemisphere and the interactions of people in the region? 2. What questions help us understand the interactions of people in the Western Hemisphere and how those interactions changed over significant periods of time? 3. Why do sources on the same topic vary, and how do we determine which ones will help us effectively interpret the past? 4. What key primary sources help us to understand the Western Hemisphere? 5. How is the bias of the author of a source reflected in the source itself? 6. How have interactions of the past impacted modern times? 7. Why should we include multiple and diverse perspectives in our understanding of history in the Western Hemisphere?
u939 (x=108) Sixth Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 74 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.65]
u943 Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers evaluate historical sources including but not limited to visual, oral, and written, for purpose, audience, point of view, context, reliability, and authenticity. 2. Historical thinkers use primary and secondary sources to develop and evaluate hypotheses and interpretations of historical events and figures that are supported by evidence. 3. Historical thinkers identify points of view, seek multiple sources, and develop and defend a thesis with evidence. 4. Historical thinkers use technology to explore and evaluate for accuracy of information. 5. Historical thinkers use context and content from the past to make connections to the present.
u944 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Cite specific textual evidence to support analysis of primary and secondary sources 2. Conduct research by locating, gathering, organizing information and data, and evaluating online and print resources. 3. Evaluate information critically and competently.
u945 (x=108) Sixth Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 75 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.66 | SS.6.1.2]
u948 SOCIAL STUDIES Sixth Grade, Standard 1. History
u949 Prepared Graduates: 2. Analyze historical time periods and patterns of continuity and change, through multiple perspectives, within and among cultures and societies.
u950 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Investigate the historical eras, individuals, groups, ideas, and themes within regions of the Western Hemisphere and their relationships with one another.
u952 Students Can: a. Explain how people, cultures, and ideas interact and are interconnected in the Western Hemisphere and how they have impacted modern times. For example: The
u953 “Great Dying” of Indigenous Peoples in the Americas and its consequences; rapid deforestation of the Amazon; anti-colonial and nationalist movements, the Columbian Exchange, and revolutions in energy. b. Determine and explain the historical context of key people, events, cause and effect relationships, and ideas over time including the examination of different
u954 perspectives from people involved. For example: The complex interactions between majority and minority groups and individuals involved in European colonization in the Western hemisphere. c. Identify examples of the social, political, cultural, and economic development in the Western Hemisphere. For example: The extension of networks of
u955 communication, colonial empires, patterns of migration over time, and international trade. d. Explain the interdependence and uniqueness among Indigenous Peoples in the Western Hemisphere including the existing conflict and power dynamics between
u956 Indigenous Peoples and those in power.
u958 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Make connections between information gathered and personal experiences to create, research, and revise historical questions (Creativity and Innovation, Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Engage in novel approaches, moves, directions, ideas, and/or perspectives while using inquiry and primary sources (Creativity and Innovation). 3. Plan and evaluate complex solutions to global challenges within the Western Hemisphere using multiple disciplinary lenses such as ethnic, historical, and scientific (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 4. Examine different historical perspectives expressed in primary and secondary sources (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 5. Look for and find value in different perspectives expressed by others (Adaptability and Flexibility).
u959 (x=108) Sixth Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 76 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.67]
u963 Inquiry Questions: 1. How and why have civilizations experienced continuity and change over time? 2. How do philosophies and ideas from ancient civilizations and Indigenous Peoples continue to inform and affect the present? 3. To what extent does isolation or interaction influence patterns of continuity and change? 4. What factors influenced the development of civilizations and nations in the Western Hemisphere? 5. How have technological developments continued to evolve and affect the present?
u964 Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers analyze patterns and themes across time to understand current events. 2. Historical thinkers study the people, places, ideas, and events in the Western Hemisphere to construct the story of history from diverse and multiple perspectives including those underrepresented or absent from traditional narratives by using primary and secondary sources. 3. Historical thinkers use chronology to organize time. 4. Historical thinkers examine and evaluate data for context, purpose, perspective, bias, and corroboration.
u965 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Determine an author’s point of view or purpose in a text and explain how it is conveyed in the text. 2. Identify propaganda, censorship, and bias in the media. 3. Demonstrate positive social and ethical behaviors when using technology and discuss consequences of inappropriate use. 4. Cite textual evidence from content-specific texts to demonstrate understanding and support an analysis of the text, conduct an experiment, or perform a task.
u966 (x=108) Sixth Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 77 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.68 | SS.6.2.1]
u969 SOCIAL STUDIES Sixth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
u970 Prepared Graduates: 3. Apply geographic representations and perspectives to analyze human movement, spatial patterns, systems, and the connections and relationships among them.
u971 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Use geographic tools and sources to research and make geographic inferences and predictions about the Western Hemisphere.
u973 Students Can: a. Use geographic tools to identify, locate, and describe places and regions in the Western Hemisphere to investigate and solve geographic problems. For example:
u974 Farming practices in a dry climate, implications of building a dam, and deforestation. b. Collect, analyze, and synthesize data from geographic tools to compare regions in the Western Hemisphere. c. Examine geographic sources to formulate and investigate inquiry questions to understand the past, analyze the present, or plan for the future. d. Interpret geographic data/evidence to draw conclusions, make predictions, and justify potential solutions to problems at the local, state, national, and global levels.
u976 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Apply knowledge to set goals, make informed decisions and transfer to new contexts (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Engage in novel approaches, directions, ideas, and/or perspectives while using the inquiry process to analyze primary and secondary sources (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 3. Collaborate with others to plan and evaluate complex solutions to global challenges within the Western Hemisphere using multiple disciplinary lenses such as ethnic, historical, and scientific (Global and Cultural Awareness). 4. Demonstrate task management attributes associated with producing high quality products. For example: (a) Work positively and ethically; (b) Manage time and projects effectively; (c) Multi-task, and; (d) Clearly communicate with others (Collaboration and Teamwork, Self-Management). 5. Apply and communicate solutions by formulating an action plan for real-world problems (Collaboration and Teamwork). 6. Revisit, reflect on, and revise inquiry questions based on analysis of geographic data (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u977 Inquiry Questions: 1. How can geographic tools be used to solve problems in the future? 2. Why does where we live influence how we live? 3. How do populations, physical features, distribution of natural resources, and perceptions of places and regions change over time? 4. How have geographic factors influenced human settlement, economic activity, and land acquisition?
u978 (x=108) Sixth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 78 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.69]
u982 Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers use geographic tools to develop spatial thinking and awareness skills. 2. Geographic thinkers evaluate patterns that connect people in the Western Hemisphere to the rest of the world. 3. Geographic thinkers explore how technology is used to solve geographic problems. 4. Geographic thinkers explore how technology is used to solve geographic problems.
u983 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Integrate visual information such as charts, graphs, photographs, videos, or maps, with other information in print and digital texts. 2. Explain and justify decisions and shared content using online maps, graphs, charts, data, and diagrams. 3. Manage the flow of information from a wide variety of sources. 4. Present arguments or information in a logical sequence with a clear claim, supportive evidence, and effective presence that builds credibility. 5. Generate questions to guide research, gather information from print and digital sources, determine biases and credibility of sources, cite sources accurately, and use evidence and reasoning to answer research questions. 6. Examine the presentation of facts and opinions in a text to evaluate its reliability.
u984 (x=108) Sixth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 79 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.70 | SS.6.2.2]
u987 SOCIAL STUDIES Sixth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
u988 Prepared Graduates: 4. Examine the characteristics of places and regions, and the changing nature among geographic and human interactions.
u989 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Evaluate how regional differences and perspectives in the Western Hemisphere impact human and environmental interactions.
u991 (x=414) Inquiry Questions: 1. What are different ways to define regions in the Western Hemisphere based on human and physical systems? 2. What have been the positive and negative consequences of human interactions with the environment? 3. How has globalization changed the ways societies in the Western Hemisphere interact with people, places, and their environment? 4. How did contact between Western and Eastern societies affect and change the environment?
u992 (x=54) Students Can: a. Classify and analyze the types of human and geographic connections
u993 (x=68) between places and regions. b. Identify physical features of the Western Hemisphere and explain their
u994 (x=68) effects on people who reside in those regions. c. Analyze positive and negative interactions of human and physical systems in
u995 (x=68) the Western Hemisphere and give examples of how people have adapted to and modified their physical environment. d. Use characteristics to define physical and political regions of the past and
u996 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers analyze data and construct geographic tools to examine places and regions and the connections among them. 2. Geographic thinkers analyze the relationship between human and physical systems. For example: Conflict and cooperation over resource distribution and trade. 3. Geographic thinkers analyze data regarding physical and human systems to make informed choices, solve problems, and make predictions.
u997 (x=68) present.
u999 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Look for and find value in studying different perspectives expressed by others (Adaptability and Flexibility). 2. Plan and evaluate complex solutions to global challenges within the Western Hemisphere that are appropriate to their contexts using multiple disciplinary lenses such as ethnic, historical, and scientific (Global and Cultural Awareness). 3. Apply knowledge to set goals, make informed decisions and transfer to new contexts (Creativity and Innovation).
u1000 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Analyze how a key individual, event, or idea is introduced, illustrated, and elaborated in a text. 2. Differentiate between facts and opinions in a text. 3. Demonstrate positive social and ethical behaviors when using technology and discuss consequences of inappropriate use. 4. Use information accurately and creatively for the issue or problem at hand. 5. Analyze different texts (including experiments, simulations, video, or multimedia texts) to compare competing theories, points of view, and arguments in the discipline.
u1001 (x=108) Sixth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 80 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.71 | SS.6.3.1]
u1005 SOCIAL STUDIES Sixth Grade, Standard 3. Economics
u1006 Prepared Graduates: 5. Evaluate how scarce resources are allocated in societies through the analysis of individual choice, market interaction, and public policy.
u1007 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Investigate how different economic systems developed based on access to resources, societal values, and human experiences, in order to address the problem of scarcity.
u1009 (x=414) Inquiry Questions: 1. How do different economic systems address the distribution of scarce resources and the production of goods and services? 2. How do consumers and societies address scarcity and opportunity cost? 3. How do consumers and societies use trade networks to acquire resources?
u1010 (x=54) Students Can: a. Describe how current economic systems in the Western Hemisphere (such
u1011 (x=68) as traditional, command, market, and mixed) developed. b. Use economic reasoning to explain how specialization of production in a
u1012 (x=68) country can result in more interdependence. For example: International trade patterns. c. Explain how different societies view and use money and resources. d. Describe the role of competition and supply and demand in the
u1013 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Economics: 1. Economic thinkers study economic data in order to analyze economic problems. 2. Economic thinkers use economic tools to recognize patterns of economic exchange to make informed decisions and solve economic problems. For example: Specialization, trade, opportunity cost, interdependence, and supply and demand. 3. Economic thinkers use disciplinary vocabulary such as Gross Domestic Product, per capita income, and the Human Development Index to discuss economic systems in the Western Hemisphere.
u1014 (x=68) determination of prices and wages in a market economy.
u1016 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Plan and evaluate complex solutions to global economic system challenges using multiple disciplinary lenses such as cultural, historical, and scientific (Civic Engagement, Global and Cultural Awareness). 2. Look for and find value in different economic perspectives expressed by others (Adaptability and Flexibility). 3. Make connections between information gathered and personal experiences to research economic questions (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u1017 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Support claim(s) with clear reasons and relevant evidence, using credible sources and demonstrating an understanding of the topic or text. 2. Read to identify cause-and-effect relationships, compare and contrast information, fact vs. opinion, and author bias. 3. Use content-specific technology tools to support learning and research.
u1018 (x=108) Sixth Grade, Standard 3. Economics
=== page 81 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.72 | SS.6.4.1]
u1022 SOCIAL STUDIES Sixth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
u1023 Prepared Graduates: 6. Express an understanding of how civic participation affects policy by applying the rights and responsibilities of a citizen.
u1024 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Examine civic participation within different governmental systems of the Western Hemisphere.
u1026 Students Can: a. Examine changes and connections in ideas about citizenship in different times and places in the Western Hemisphere. For example: Indigenous Peoples are either
u1027 denied citizenship or citizenship is not always desired; immigration and a nation’s quota preferences; and the changes in naturalization requirements change over time. b. Explain how political ideas of significant people and groups interact, are interconnected, and influence nations and regions in the Western Hemisphere, both in the
u1028 past and today. c. Analyze political issues from national and global perspectives over time in North America, South America, and the Caribbean. d. Identify historical examples illustrating how people from diverse backgrounds such as African American, Latino, Asian American, and Indigenous Peoples in the
u1029 Western Hemisphere perceived, reacted to, and influenced national and international policies and issues.
u1031 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Examine how individuals in the Western Hemisphere interpret messages differently, and how values and points of view are included or excluded (Data Literacy). 2. Analyze how a specific problem can manifest itself at local, regional, and global levels, and how media can influence beliefs and behaviors (Media Literacy). 3. Plan and evaluate complex solutions to global challenges in the Western Hemisphere, using multiple disciplinary lenses such as ethnic, historical, and scientific (Interpersonal Communication, Global and Cultural Awareness). 4. Look for and find value in different perspectives expressed by others (Adaptability and Flexibility). 5. Follow a process identified by others to help generate ideas, negotiate roles and responsibilities, and respect consensus in decision making (Interpersonal Communication, Collaboration and Teamwork). 6. Participate in social or community activities (Civic Engagement, Interpersonal Communication).
u1032 Inquiry Questions: 1. What does it mean to live in an interconnected world? 2. How can you be a productive member of the global community and a contributing citizen of the United States? 3. Why are there greater challenges and opportunities when multiple groups interact? 4. Why do national and global viewpoints sometimes differ?
u1033 (x=108) Sixth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 82 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.73]
u1037 5. What are some of the barriers that prevent some people from various communities such as African American, Latino, Indigenous peoples, Asian American, Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, LGBTQ, and religious minorities from being “contributing” citizens? 6. What is the myth of the “model minority” and how is it harmful to minority groups?
u1038 Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals discuss and analyze how various government decisions impact people, places, and history. 2. Civic-minded individuals analyze how the actions of individuals and groups can have a local, national, and international impact. 3. Civic-minded individuals analyze the relationship between rights and responsibility in national and global contexts. 4. Civic-minded individuals explain how nations are interconnected and affect each other. For example: Businesses may be affected by the laws and regulations of a nation; markets may be impacted by drought, earthquakes, and other natural disasters throughout the world; and international trade restrictions, election interference, and pandemics also influence markets. 5. Civic-minded individuals demonstrate how technology provides daily information regarding the interaction between the United States government and other nations. 6. Civic-minded individuals apply the inquiry process, collaborative problem-solving, and design thinking to create actionable solutions to civic problems. 7. Civic-minded individuals investigate inquiry questions by drawing conclusions from and synthesizing relevant evidence from primary and secondary sources, statistical data, current events/media. For example: interviews, surveys, podcasts, news articles, social media, and databases.
u1039 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Describe how a text presents information. For example: Text features, evidence, organization, persuasive techniques, word choice, tone. 2. Communicate and present information orally, in writing, and through the development of multimedia presentations, and other forms of technology in an effective manner. 3. Evaluate sources of information for context, bias, corroboration, propaganda, and differentiate facts from opinions, including using lateral reading and corroboration to verify factual information. 4. Evaluate the credibility, authority, relevance, and purpose of online and print sources.
u1040 (x=108) Sixth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 83 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.74 | SS.6.4.2]
u1043 SOCIAL STUDIES Sixth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
u1044 Prepared Graduates: 7. Analyze the origins, structures, and functions of governments to evaluate the impact on citizens and the global society.
u1045 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Explain how the development and features of systems of government in the Western Hemisphere relate to their citizens.
u1047 Students Can: a. Examine and explain the development of foundational principles of government systems in the Western Hemisphere. b. Describe structures and functions of different systems of government in the Western Hemisphere. c. Identify how different systems of government relate to their citizens in the Western Hemisphere and how systems of government create advantages for some of
u1048 their citizens and disadvantages for others. d. Compare the economic components of the different systems of government in the Western Hemisphere. e. Explain the value each nation and/or culture places on economic prosperity, individual liberty, human rights, freedom of the press, freedom of religion, equal rights,
u1049 and respect for neighbors. f. Investigate the historical, social, and cultural influences of minorities on civil governments of the United States, and the rest of the Western Hemisphere.
u1051 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Examine how individuals interpret messages differently, how values and points of view are included or excluded, and how media can influence beliefs and behaviors (Media Literacy, Digital Literacy). 2. Plan and evaluate complex solutions to global challenges, in the Western Hemisphere, which are appropriate to their contexts, using multiple disciplinary perspectives such as ethnic, historical, and scientific (Civic Engagement, Global and Cultural Awareness). 3. Look for and find value in different perspectives expressed by others in the Western Hemisphere (Adaptability and Flexibility). 4. Apply ethical perspectives/concepts to an ethical question/situation/scenario (Civic Engagement, Interpersonal Communication).
u1052 Inquiry Questions: 1. What is the purpose of government? 2. What evidence can you find of effective and ineffective governments in the past and the present? 3. What would a government look like if you created it? 4. What are the consequences if a government does not provide for the common good? 5. How do government systems affect social structure and citizens’ quality of life? 6. How do individuals and groups effectively influence government systems?
u1053 (x=108) Sixth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 84 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.75]
u1057 Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals discuss and evaluate how personal and national actions have global consequences. 2. Civic-minded individuals analyze current and historical examples of ways in which lives are enriched and challenged because of the interconnected nature of a global society. 3. Civic-minded individuals investigate how different forms of government affect daily life. For example: Employees work in international corporations and tourists visit countries with different laws, rules, and regulations. 4. Civic-minded individuals apply knowledge of civic concepts to understanding the implications of events around the world. 5. Civic-minded individuals use the inquiry process to ask, investigate, and answer civic questions related to civic issues of the present and past. 6. Civic-minded individuals understand how people collaborate with others to design, revise, and communicate solutions to civic problems affecting local, regional, and global communities, including connections between local and global societies.
u1058 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Identify key steps in a text’s description of a process related to history/social studies. 2. Describe how a text presents information. For example: Text features, evidence, organization, persuasive techniques, word choice, tone. 3. Evaluate the credibility, authority, relevance, and purpose of online and print sources, including using lateral reading and corroboration to verify factual information. 4. Synthesize information from multiple credible sources to demonstrate understanding of a topic, including comparing articles, evaluating reliability and intent, evidence, and verifying claims. 5. Evaluate sources of information for context, bias, corroboration, propaganda, and differentiate facts from opinions.
u1059 (x=108) Sixth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 85 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.76 | SS.6.5.1]
u1062 SOCIAL STUDIES Sixth Grade, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u1063 Prepared Graduates: 8. Apply economic reasoning skills to make informed personal financial decisions.
u1064 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Investigate the role of consumers and businesses within the Western Hemisphere.
u1066 (x=414) 3. What role have competition and wages played in different cultures? 4. Why is it important to analyze the various levels of a culture before understanding how individuals in that culture would make financial decisions? 5. How might your personal spending impact market growth or decline?
u1067 (x=54) Students Can: a. Explain the roles of buyers and sellers in product, labor, and financial
u1068 (x=68) markets. b. Explore how consumer spending decisions and demand impact market
u1069 (x=68) economies. c. Analyze how external factors might influence spending decisions for
u1070 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Economics (PFL): 1. Financially capable individuals determine how history, location, and the distribution of resources have impacted financial decisions. 2. Financially capable individuals understand that competition and wages are not just American concepts. These concepts have applied to individual financial decisions long before the birth of the nation. 3. Financially capable individuals understand that populations within various cultures have made individual financial decisions differently throughout time and location. 4. Financially capable individuals identify that peoples’ decisions as consumers are formed from diverse and unique experiences.
u1071 (x=68) different individuals. d. Understand how basic budgeting, investing, saving, and personal behavior
u1072 (x=68) with money affects the economic system as a consumer and/or producer.
u1074 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Demonstrate an understanding of cause and effect related to personal financial decisions (Civic Engagement, Interpersonal Communication). 2. Identify and explain multiple perspectives (cultural and global) when exploring economic events, ideas, and issues within the Western Hemisphere (Civic Engagement, Global and Cultural Awareness). 3. Assess personal strengths and limitations with a well-grounded sense of confidence, optimism, and a growth mindset (Self-Awareness).
u1075 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Analyze how and why individuals, events, and ideas develop on social media. 2. Explain how a question represents key ideas in the field. 3. Explain points of agreement experts have about interpretations and applications of disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a compelling question. 4. Integrate multimedia as effective tools for presenting and clarifying information.
u1076 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. How did different societies in the Western Hemisphere define the roles of buyers and sellers in the various markets? 2. What role did the distribution of resources play in personal financial decisions?
u1077 (x=108) Sixth Grade, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
=== page 86 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.77 | SS.7.1.1]
u1081 SOCIAL STUDIES Seventh Grade, Standard 1. History
u1082 Prepared Graduates: 1. Apply the process of inquiry to examine and analyze how historical knowledge is viewed, constructed, and interpreted.
u1083 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Analyze and interpret a variety of primary and secondary sources from multiple perspectives in the Eastern Hemisphere to formulate an appropriate thesis supported by relevant evidence.
u1085 Students Can: a. Analyze primary and secondary sources to explain the interdependence and uniqueness among peoples in the Eastern Hemisphere, including their influence on
u1086 modern society. b. Examine primary and secondary sources from multiple and diverse perspectives to identify point of view using art, eyewitness accounts, letters and diaries, artifacts,
u1087 historical sites, charts, graphs, diagrams, and written texts.
u1089 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Make connections between information gathered and personal experiences to generate a thesis (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Engage in novel approaches, ideas, and/or perspectives while using inquiry and primary and secondary sources (Creativity and Innovation). 3. Examine different historical perspectives expressed in primary and secondary sources (Adaptability and Flexibility). 4. Use a focus statement and questioning protocols to generate, evaluate, improve, and select high quality historical inquiry questions (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 5. Utilize primary and secondary sources to examine how individuals interpret messages differently, how values and points of view are included or excluded, and how media can influence beliefs and behaviors (Media Literacy, Digital Literacy, Data Literacy).
u1090 Inquiry Questions: 1. Why is continued research and inquiry about historical events beneficial? 2. Why do historians often have different interpretations of the same historical events? 3. How can analyzing historical events from multiple perspectives be beneficial to understanding past and current issues? 4. How does studying patterns of continuity and change help us understand people, places, events, and issues today? 5. What can an artifact or primary source document reveal about the past?
u1091 Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers construct an understanding of history through the gathering and analysis of historical sources. 2. Historical thinkers differentiate between primary and secondary sources and apply this understanding to deepen analysis. 3. Historical thinkers analyze sources deeply by applying understanding of analysis techniques. For example: Sourcing, contextualization, corroboration, and close reading.
u1092 (x=108) Seventh Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 87 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.78]
u1096 4. Historical thinkers construct the story of the past by interpreting events from multiple perspectives, including those marginalized or absent from traditional narratives. 5. Historical thinkers defend a thesis with relevant evidence from multiple primary and secondary sources.
u1097 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Determine the main idea(s) or relevant information of a primary or secondary source. 2. Analyze multiple points of view to establish a comparative approach to interpretation. 3. Utilize valid reasoning to develop a supported position on a historic matter. 4. Cite specific textual evidence to support analysis of primary and secondary sources. 5. Evaluate the reliability, accuracy, relevance, and bias of online and print sources.
u1098 (x=108) Seventh Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 88 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.79 | SS.7.1.2]
u1101 SOCIAL STUDIES Seventh Grade, Standard 1. History
u1102 Prepared Graduates: 2. Analyze historical time periods and patterns of continuity and change, through multiple perspectives, within and among cultures and societies.
u1103 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Apply an understanding of the historical context of significant current events, individuals, groups, ideas, and themes within regions of the Eastern Hemisphere and their relationships with one another, to draw conclusions, and solve problems.
u1105 Students Can: a. Identify and explain the historical context of key people, regions, events, and ideas, including the roots of current issues. For example: The contributions of Mansa
u1106 Musa, the roots of Abrahamic religions, the significance of political revolutions, the implications of the Atlantic Slave Trade, the rise of European Nationalism, and the rise of Communism. b. Investigate and evaluate the social, political, cultural, and technological development of regions in the Eastern Hemisphere. For example: The river valley
u1107 civilizations, Hammurabi’s Code, Greek democracy, the Roman Republic, the Chinese inventions of gunpowder and the compass, and the printing press. c. Describe the interactions, conflicts, and contributions of various peoples and cultures that have lived in or migrated within/to the Eastern Hemisphere. For example:
u1108 Conflicts over land and resources between countries, the foundations of eastern world religions, the historical roots of current issues, East/West contact, settlement patterns, the Korean War, the war in Vietnam, the Chinese Cultural Revolution, the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia, including acts of violence towards groups of people, and the discriminatory policies and events preceding those acts. d. Explain the interdependence and uniqueness among peoples in the Eastern Hemisphere during significant eras or events, including their influence on modern
u1109 society. For example: African Empires, the Silk Road and cultural diffusion, and the colonization of Africa, India, and Australia. e. Describe how the non-violent strategies employed by Dr. King and his followers overcame segregation in the American South.
u1111 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Use a focus statement and questioning protocols to generate, evaluate, improve, and select high quality historical inquiry questions (Data Literacy). 2. Plan and evaluate complex solutions to global challenges within the Eastern Hemisphere using multiple disciplinary lenses such as ethnic, historical, and scientific (Civic Engagement). 3. Examine different historical perspectives expressed in primary and secondary sources (Adaptability and Flexibility).
u1112 Inquiry Questions: 1. How and why have civilizations experienced continuity and change over time? 2. To what extent does isolation or interaction influence patterns of continuity and change? 3. What factors influenced the development of civilizations and nations in the Eastern Hemisphere?
u1113 (x=108) Seventh Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 89 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.80]
u1117 Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers analyze patterns and themes throughout time to understand current events. 2. Historical thinkers construct history using a variety of sources. 3. Historical thinkers construct history from facts and real-life events, while also seeking to understand multiple and diverse perspectives and influences on those events. 4. Historical thinkers consider multiple perspectives to interpret history and outcomes. 5. Historical thinkers use chronology to organize time. 6. Historical thinkers examine and evaluate data for context, purpose, perspective, bias, and corroboration.
u1118 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Utilizing textual evidence, analyze the development and changes of people, events, and ideas. 2. Interpret information presented in diverse media and formats (e.g., visually, quantitatively, and orally) and explain how it contributes to a topic, text, or issue under study.
u1119 (x=108) Seventh Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 90 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.81 | SS.7.2.1]
u1122 SOCIAL STUDIES Seventh Grade, Standard 2. Geography
u1123 Prepared Graduates: 3. Apply geographic representations and perspectives to analyze human movement, spatial patterns, systems, and the connections and relationships among them.
u1124 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Use geographic tools and sources to research and make geographic inferences and predictions about the Eastern Hemisphere.
u1126 Students Can: a. Use maps and geographic tools to find patterns in human systems and/or physical features to investigate and propose a solution to geographic problems. b. Collect, classify, and analyze data to make geographic inferences and predictions. c. Apply inquiry and research utilizing geographic tools. For example: GPS and satellite imagery. d. Interpret maps to make inferences and predictions. e. Investigate geographic sources to formulate inquiry questions to understand the past, analyze the present, or plan for the future. f. Assess geographic data to draw conclusions, make predictions, and justify potential solutions to problems in the Eastern Hemisphere at the local, state, national,
u1127 and global levels using supporting evidence and logical reasoning.
u1129 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Test hypotheses/prototypes with planned processes for getting feedback (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Evaluate information using spatial technologies (Digital Literacy, Data Literacy). 3. Look for and find value in studying different perspectives expressed by others (Adaptability and Flexibility). 4. Plan and evaluate complex solutions to global challenges within the Eastern Hemisphere that are appropriate to their contexts using multiple disciplinary lenses such as ethnic, historical, and scientific (Civic Engagement, Global and Cultural Awareness).
u1130 Inquiry Questions: 1. How are different types of maps important in understanding various types of information? 2. How could geographic data be used for both positive and negative results? 3. What is the importance of using various geographic tools to analyze topics? 4. How have migration and settlement patterns been affected by physical geography?
u1131 Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers construct geographic representations to represent and explain spatial patterns of cultural and environmental characteristics. 2. Geographic thinkers analyze the relationship between human and environmental patterns. 3. Geographic thinkers analyze data regarding physical and human systems to make informed choices, solve problems, and make predictions.
u1132 (x=108) Seventh Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 91 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.82]
u1136 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Gather relevant information from multiple print and digital sources, using search terms effectively; assess the credibility and accuracy of each source. 2. Draw evidence from informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and research. 3. Conduct short research projects to answer a question (including a self-generated question), drawing on several sources and generating additional related, focused questions that allow for multiple avenues of exploration. 4. Conduct an inquiry-based research project that applies critical-thinking skills (analysis, synthesis, evaluation, organization) to information and knowledge in order to construct new understandings, draw conclusions, and create new knowledge.
u1137 (x=108) Seventh Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 92 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.83 | SS.7.2.2]
u1140 SOCIAL STUDIES Seventh Grade, Standard 2. Geography
u1141 Prepared Graduates: 4. Examine the characteristics of places and regions, and the changing nature among geographic and human interactions.
u1142 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Evaluate regional differences and perspectives in the Eastern Hemisphere and how they impact human and environmental interactions.
u1144 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers study ethnic and religious groups, in order to explain how they view a region and evaluate the use of resources in a region to predict and propose future uses. 2. Geographic thinkers study the various definitions of regions to analyze human choice, solve problems, and make predictions.
u1145 (x=54) Students Can: a. Determine how physical and political features impact cultural diffusion and
u1146 (x=68) regional differences. For example: Modern environmental issues, cultural patterns, trade barriers, and economic interdependence. b. Examine the geographic location and distribution of resources within a
u1147 (x=68) region to determine the economic and social impact on its people. For example: Middle Eastern water rights, the acceptance of refugees from other countries, and the Salt Trade.
u1148 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Analyze informational text(s) to better understand and evaluate the author’s perspective and purpose. 2. Evaluate the reasons and evidence that authors use to support their arguments and specific claims in informational text(s). 3. Distinguish among fact, opinion, and reasoned judgment in a text. 4. Identify propaganda, censorship, and bias in texts and other forms of media.
u1150 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Look for and find value in perspectives expressed by others (Adaptability and Flexibility). 2. Plan for and evaluate complex solutions to global challenges using multiple disciplinary lenses such as ethnic, historical, and scientific (Civic Engagement, Global and Cultural Awareness).
u1151 Inquiry Questions: 1. How do geographers apply information from a variety of sources? 2. How can a location be in different regions at the same time? 3. How do regional issues affect larger areas? 4. How do geographic characteristics impact regional issues? 5. What are different ways to define regions in the Eastern Hemisphere based on human and physical systems as they change over time? 6. How has globalization changed the ways people in the Eastern Hemisphere interact with places and their environment?
u1152 (x=108) Seventh Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 93 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.84 | SS.7.3.1]
u1156 SOCIAL STUDIES Seventh Grade, Standard 3. Economics
u1157 Prepared Graduates: 5. Evaluate how scarce resources are allocated in societies through the analysis of individual choice, market interaction, and public policy.
u1158 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Describe how economic systems in the Eastern Hemisphere developed based on access to resources, societal values, and human experiences in order to address the problem of scarcity.
u1160 Students Can: a. Describe how economic systems in the Eastern Hemisphere (such as traditional, command, market, and mixed) were developed. b. Evaluate the different economic systems in the Eastern Hemisphere, utilizing economic data. For example: Economic growth, per capita income, and standard of
u1161 living. c. Explain how trade supply and demand affects the production of goods and services in different regions. d. Determine how scarcity affects the economic system in the Eastern Hemisphere.
u1163 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Take action from failure, connect learning across domains, and recognize new opportunities (Perseverance and Resilience). 2. Plan and evaluate complex solutions to global economic system challenges using multiple disciplinary lenses, such as cultural, historical, and scientific (Civic Engagement; Global and Cultural Awareness). 3. Look for and find value in different economic perspectives (Adaptability and Flexibility). 4. Make connections between information gathered and personal experiences to research economic questions (Critical Thinking and Analysis; Collaboration and Teamwork).
u1164 Inquiry Questions: 1. How do different types of economic systems address the distribution of scarce resources and the production of goods and services? 2. How can economic systems be reflected using data? 3. How does supply and demand impact the price of goods and services? 4. When goods and services are scarce what might happen to price? Why? 5. How does scarcity of resources, goods, and services affect local, regional, and global economies? 6. How has trade played a role in economic, cultural, and technological change?
u1165 (x=108) Seventh Grade, Standard 3. Economics
=== page 94 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.85]
u1169 Nature and Skills of Economics: 1. Economic thinkers study the relationship between local consumers and global producers. 2. Economic thinkers investigate and inform government actions to reduce or solve social issues. 3. Economic thinkers compare different economics systems to determine their impact on producers and consumers. 4. Economic thinkers explore how economic development varies and can be compared across countries in the Eastern Hemisphere including levels of education and average income. 5. Economic thinkers use data, such as scarcity and distribution of resources, to make informed decisions and propose solutions to problems related to social issues and governmental problems. 6. Economic thinkers apply an understanding of economic concepts to explain historical phenomena in the Eastern Hemisphere. 7. Economic thinkers analyze patterns of economic exchange, such as interdependence, trade, specialization, supply and demand, resource distribution, and standard of living, to understand the past, solve problems in the present, and plan for the future.
u1170 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Integrate quantitative or technical information expressed in words in a text with a version of that information expressed visually (e.g., in a flowchart, diagram, model, graph, or table). 2. Read, view, and listen for information presented in any format (e.g., textual, visual, media, digital) in order to make inferences and gather meaning. 3. Explain how a question represents key ideas of a discipline.
u1171 (x=108) Seventh Grade, Standard 3. Economics
=== page 95 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.86 | SS.7.4.1]
u1174 SOCIAL STUDIES Seventh Grade, Standard 4. Civics
u1175 Prepared Graduates: 6. Express an understanding of how civic participation affects policy by applying the rights and responsibilities of a citizen.
u1176 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Investigate similarities and differences of civic participation within different governmental systems of the Eastern Hemisphere.
u1178 Students Can: a. Describe civic virtues and principles that guide governments and societies. For example: Citizenship, civic participation, and rule of law. b. Analyze the opportunities and limitations of civic participation in societies in the Eastern Hemisphere. c. Give examples illustrating the interactions between nations and their citizens. For example: South Africa’s system of Apartheid, human rights violations, genocide,
u1179 Shari’ah law, government sanctioned economic policies, and socialized healthcare and education. d. Identify international and regional public problems, research ways in which governments address those problems, and make connections to how the United States
u1180 government addresses issues to protect the public good. e. Compare and contrast examples of governmental implementation of civic virtues or principles.
u1182 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Follow a process identified by others to help generate ideas, negotiate roles and responsibilities, and respect consensus in decision making (Civic Engagement, Collaboration and Teamwork). 2. Participate in social or community activities (Civic Engagement). 3. Analyze how a specific problem can manifest itself at local, regional, and global levels, and how media can influence beliefs and behaviors (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 4. Examine how individuals in the Eastern Hemisphere receive messages differently, and how values and points of view are included or excluded (Data Literacy). 5. Plan and evaluate complex solutions to global challenges in the Eastern Hemisphere, using multiple disciplinary lenses such as cultural, ethnic, historical, and scientific (Civic Engagement, Global and Cultural Awareness). 6. Look for and find value in different perspectives expressed by others (Adaptability and Flexibility).
u1183 Inquiry Questions: 1. How do international laws, alliances, and organizations help facilitate solutions to global problems, for example, encouraging ethical governmental practices? 2. How do the actions of a nation influence other nations and international organizations? 3. How can laws, governments, peacekeeping organizations, and citizens work to recognize the stages of genocide in order to identify instances of genocide, so that it may be prevented and eliminated in the future? 4. How do citizens perceive, react to, and shape government policies and civic virtues and principles?
u1184 (x=108) Seventh Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 96 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.87]
u1188 Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals develop criteria to apply standards of ethics and quality in evaluating the effectiveness of government. 2. Civic-minded individuals apply understanding of the connections and complexities of interactions among nations to analyze civic issues. 3. Civic-minded individuals collaborate with others to design, revise, and communicate solutions to civic problems affecting local, regional, and global communities, including connections between local and global societies. 4. Civic-minded individuals discuss and analyze how various government decisions impact people, places, and history. 5. Civic-minded individuals analyze how the actions of individuals and groups can have a local, national, and international impact.
u1189 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Evaluate sources of information for context, bias, corroboration, propaganda, and distinguish among fact, opinion, and reasoned judgment in a text. 2. Summarize the points an author/speaker makes and explain how each claim is supported by reasons and evidence. 3. Evaluate the credibility, authority, relevance, and purpose of online and print sources, including using lateral reading and corroboration to verify factual information. 4. Demonstrate positive social and ethical behaviors when using technology and discuss consequences of inappropriate use. 5. Synthesize information from multiple credible sources to demonstrate understanding of a topic, including comparing articles, evaluating reliability and intent, evidence, and verifying claims. 6. Describe how a text presents information. For example: text features, evidence, organization, persuasive techniques, word choice, and tone.
u1190 (x=108) Seventh Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 97 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.88 | SS.7.4.2]
u1193 SOCIAL STUDIES Seventh Grade, Standard 4. Civics
u1194 Prepared Graduates: 7. Analyze the origins, structures, and functions of governments to evaluate the impact on citizens and the global society.
u1195 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Analyze how nations in various regions of the Eastern Hemisphere interact with international organizations, govern, organize, and impact their societies in different ways.
u1197 Students Can: a. Explain the origins, functions, and structure of different governments. For example: Dictatorship, totalitarianism, authoritarian, monarchy, democracy, constitutional
u1198 republic, socialism, fascism, and communism. b. Evaluate and analyze how various governments and organizations interact, resolve their differences, and cooperate. For example: The African Union (AU), the
u1199 Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the United Nations, the World Bank, international treaties, and diplomacy. c. Investigate examples of collaboration and interdependence between international organizations and countries. For example: The protection of human rights; the
u1200 role of non-governmental organizations (NGOs), the Red Cross, World Health Organization, and United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
u1202 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Apply ethical perspectives/concepts to an ethical question/situation/scenario (Civic Engagement, Self-Awareness). 2. Follow a process identified by others to help generate ideas, negotiate roles and responsibilities, and respect consensus in decision making (Civic Engagement, Collaboration and Teamwork). 3. Analyze how a specific problem can manifest itself at local, regional, and global levels, and how media can influence beliefs and behaviors (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 4. Examine how individuals in the Eastern Hemisphere interpret messages differently, how values and points of view are included or excluded (Data Literacy). 5. Plan and evaluate complex solutions to challenges in the Eastern Hemisphere using multiple disciplinary lenses such as cultural, ethnic, historical, and scientific (Civic Engagement, Global and Cultural Awareness). 6. Look for and find value in different perspectives expressed by others (Adaptability and Flexibility).
u1203 Inquiry Questions: 1. What are fundamental human rights and how are they protected? 2. How can governmental policy lead to problems or help solve problems? 3. How do the origins, structures, and functions of a government relate to its people’s values and ideals? 4. How can governments encourage interaction between societies and international organizations?
u1204 (x=108) Seventh Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 98 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.89]
u1208 5. How do nations attempt to address conflict and create cooperation through policies of isolation and interaction? 6. What are the responsibilities of national governments to the global community?
u1209 Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals can apply civil discourse skills to interact professionally, discuss issues of common concern, form consensus, respond appropriately to differences of opinion, and cooperate. 2. Civic-minded individuals apply knowledge of the different origins, structures, and functions of governments to investigate civic topics. 3. Civic-minded individuals can cite evidence, provide logical reasoning, form credible claims, and formulate relevant questions about civic topics. 4. Civic-minded individuals apply the inquiry process to investigate civic issues including the formulation and revision of questions, and use of civic analysis tools such as surveys, polls, analysis of statistical data, and close reading of primary and secondary sources. 5. Civic-minded individuals apply knowledge of the similarities and differences between different government systems to understanding local, regional, and international issues. 6. Civic-minded individuals understand how people collaborate to design, revise, and communicate solutions to civic problems affecting local, regional, and global communities, including connections between local and global societies.
u1210 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Use technology for problem solving, self-directed learning, and extended learning activities. 2. Use knowledge and research skills to engage in civil discourse and polite/professional debate around issues of common concern. 3. Present claims and findings, emphasizing main points in a focused manner with relevant descriptions, facts, details, and examples. 4. Evaluate, contextualize, and synthesize valid and accurate evidence from multiple credible sources. 5. Use evaluative techniques such as lateral reading to distinguish between fact, opinion, and reasoned judgment, and to determine the credibility of a source.
u1211 (x=108) Seventh Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 99 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.90 | SS.7.5.1]
u1214 SOCIAL STUDIES Seventh Grade, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u1215 Prepared Graduates: 8. Apply economic reasoning skills to make informed personal financial decisions.
u1216 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Investigate the role of consumers and businesses within the Eastern Hemisphere.
u1218 Students Can: a. Define resources from an economic and personal finance perspective. b. Summarize how the distribution of resources impacts consumerism. c. Compare and contrast goods and services available to consumers within different cultures as they developed in the Eastern Hemisphere throughout history.
u1220 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Demonstrate an understanding of cause and effect related to personal decisions (Social Awareness, Self-Awareness). 2. Identify and explain multiple perspectives (cultural and global) when exploring events, ideas, issues (Civic Engagement, Global and Cultural Awareness).
u1221 Inquiry Questions: 1. What are the similarities and differences between different markets in the Eastern Hemisphere?
u1222 Nature and Skills of Economics (PFL): 1. Financially capable individuals understand that financial decisions have been impacted by the history, location, and distribution of resources of a place. 2. Financially capable individuals study various factors that influence production such as resources, supply and demand, and price, which affect individual consumer choices over time. 3. Financially capable individuals understand that the distribution of resources influences cultural growth and development over time and have impacted many of the different early civilizations around the world. 4. Financially capable individuals understand that competition and wages are not just American concepts. These concepts have applied to individual financial decisions long before the birth of the nation. 5. Financially capable individuals understand that populations within various cultures have made individual financial decisions differently throughout time and location.
u1223 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Explain how a question represents key ideas in the field. 2. Analyze how and why individuals, events, and ideas develop. 3. Explain points of agreement experts have about interpretations and applications of disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a compelling question.
u1224 (x=108) Seventh Grade, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
=== page 100 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.91 | SS.8.1.1]
u1228 SOCIAL STUDIES Eighth Grade, Standard 1. History
u1229 Prepared Graduates: 1. Apply the process of inquiry to examine and analyze how historical knowledge is viewed, constructed, and interpreted.
u1230 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Investigate and evaluate primary and secondary sources from multiple diverse perspectives about United States history from the American Revolution through Reconstruction to formulate and defend claims with textual evidence and logical reasoning.
u1232 Students Can: a. Use and interpret documents and other relevant primary and secondary sources pertaining to United States history from multiple diverse perspectives. b. Analyze evidence from multiple sources including those with conflicting accounts about specific events in both Colorado and United States history. For example:
u1233 Indigenous Peoples’, Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, and African American perspectives on Western colonization and enslavement; Asian American and Latinos’ perspectives on immigration; and the Indian Removal Act, the Buffalo Soldiers, and the Sand Creek Massacre. c. Critique data for point of view, historical context, distortion, or propaganda and relevance to historical inquiry. d. Construct a written historical argument supported by relevant evidence and logical reasoning demonstrating the use or understanding of primary and secondary
u1234 sources. e. Synthesize data from multiple sources in order to connect those sources to the traditional historical narrative.
u1236 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Interpret information and draw conclusions based on deep analysis of primary and secondary sources. (Critical Thinking/Problem Solving) 2. Synthesize ideas in insightful ways by examining multiple perspectives from the American Revolution through Reconstruction (Creativity and Innovation). 3. Make predictions and design data/information collection to analyze conflicting perspectives (Data Literacy). 4. Look for and find value in perspectives expressed by others (Adaptability/Flexibility).
u1237 Inquiry Questions: 1. What ideas inspired the writing of America’s founding documents? 2. How have America’s founding documents impacted Americans? 3. Why do historians sometimes come to different conclusions about the same historical events? 4. Should and can historians be completely impartial when writing about history? 5. To what degree is there consistency among historical narratives written by historians about early U.S. history?
u1238 (x=108) Eighth Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 101 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.92]
u1242 Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers interpret history through the examination of primary and secondary sources with multiple perspectives. 2. Historical thinkers gather and synthesize information from primary and secondary sources to evaluate and create hypotheses of historical events and include supporting evidence to defend their claim. 3. Historical thinkers analyze modern and historical maps, through geographic tools, to explain how historical events are shaped by geography. 4. Historical thinkers use technology to produce and present primary and secondary sources clearly and efficiently. 5. Historical thinkers use the context and content from the past to make connections to the present. For example: Connecting the Civil War to current social and political issues, the boom-and-bust cycle of economics with the Gold Rush, and the impact of transportation during the development of the western United States and Colorado. 6. Historical thinkers use the historical method of inquiry to interpret and refine history and analyze multiple perspectives. For example: Historians and communities preserve historical documents, artifacts, and buildings. 7. Historical thinkers apply the inquiry process by developing a focus statement and questioning protocols to generate, evaluate, improve, and select high quality historical inquiry questions. 8. Historical thinkers apply analysis techniques to deepen understanding of primary and secondary sources. For example: Sourcing, contextualization, corroboration, and close reading.
u1243 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Seek information from varied sources and perspectives to develop informed opinions and creative solutions. 2. Evaluate the reliability, accuracy, relevance, and bias of online and print sources. 3. Ask, investigate, and answer historical questions through the interpretation of primary sources. 4. Use criteria to evaluate the quality of claims or evidence in a source. 5. Develop a clear sense of historical time, past, present, and future in order to identify the sequence in which events occurred. 6. Conduct research by locating, gathering, and organizing information to present orally and in writing by using appropriate technology resources to support learning.
u1244 (x=108) Eighth Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 102 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.93 | SS.8.1.2]
u1247 SOCIAL STUDIES Eighth Grade, Standard 1. History
u1248 Prepared Graduates: 2. Analyze historical time periods and patterns of continuity and change, through multiple perspectives, within and among cultures and societies.
u1249 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Develop a contextual understanding of the historical eras, individuals, groups, ideas, and themes from the origins of the American Revolution through Reconstruction.
u1251 Students Can: a. Determine and explain the historical context of key people and events from the Revolutionary War Era through Reconstruction including the examination of
u1252 different perspectives. For example: Grievances from the colonists against the British Parliament, the Constitutional Convention, the role of abolitionists, contributions and grievances from Indigenous Peoples and African Americans, and the causes and effects of the Civil War. b. Evaluate continuity and change over the course of United States history by examining various eras and determining major sources of conflict and compromise both
u1253 in Colorado and across the nation. Including but not limited to: the Indian Removal Act, the Buffalo Soldiers, and the Sand Creek Massacre. c. Examine the causes and effects of the territorial, political, and economic expansion of the United States. d. Evaluate the impact of various gender, age, race, ethnicity, religion, and class during this time period and the impact of these demographic groups on the events of
u1254 the time period. e. Analyze the cause and effect relationships of major conflicts from the origins of the American Revolution through Reconstruction. f. Analyze ideas that are critical to the understanding of early United States history. For example: Ideas involved in major events and movements such as settler
u1255 colonialism, the changing definition of liberty and citizenship, enslavement of African and Indigenous Peoples, federalism, nativism of the Antebellum period, emancipation, and expansionism.
u1257 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Interpret information and draw conclusions based on multiple perspectives (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Synthesize ideas in insightful ways about historical eras, individuals, groups, ideas, and themes (Creativity and Innovation). 3. Make predictions and design data/information collection and analysis strategies to recognize continuity and change through time (Critical Thinking and Analysis, Data Literacy). 4. Look for and find value in perspectives expressed by others (Adaptability/Flexibility).
u1258 (x=108) Eighth Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 103 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.94]
u1262 Inquiry Questions: 1. How have the basic values and principles of American democracy changed over time and in what ways have they been preserved? 2. How was North American colonial settlement perceived by Indigenous Peoples, and how did this impact their culture and survival throughout the continent? 3. What role did economics play in the establishments and perpetuation of the enslavement of peoples from the 17th century onward? 4. How did the application of the rights found in the Declaration of Independence change over time? 5. To what extent are the ideas of the American Revolution and the United States Constitution still affecting the world today? 6. How did America define itself as a “new” nation in the early 19th century? 7. How did different groups of people participate in, respond to, and resist Westward Expansion? 8. How did Americans redefine the right to vote during the 19th century? 9. To what extent did the13th Amendment truly end slavery? 10. What role did various and diverse social groups such as women, African Americans, and Indigenous Peoples play in the Civil War? 11. To what extent did the 13th Amendment truly end slavery? 12. How have primary documents from multiple diverse perspectives influenced people, events, and ideas in U.S. History?
u1263 Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers understand that slavery was instituted into what now is the United States of America under the laws of the English Monarch and the United States was the only nation to fight a war to eliminate slavery. 2. Historical thinkers create, investigate, and refine historical questions, and interpret history using primary and secondary sources representing multiple perspectives. 3. Historical thinkers analyze modern and historical maps, and other geographic tools, to explain how historical events are shaped by geography. 4. Historical thinkers use technology to produce and present primary and secondary sources clearly and efficiently. 5. Historical thinkers use the context and content from the past to make connections to the present locally, nationally, and globally. 6. Historical thinkers use the historical method of inquiry to interpret and refine history. For example: Historians and communities preserve historical documents, artifacts, oral histories, and buildings. 7. Historical thinkers use primary and secondary sources to create a claim that logically interprets historical events and provide relevant and specific evidence and reasoning to defend their claim. 8. Historical thinkers apply analysis techniques to deepen understanding of primary and secondary sources. For example: Sourcing, contextualization, corroboration, and close reading.
u1264 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Seek information from varied sources and perspectives to develop informed opinions and creative solutions. 2. Answer a historical question through the interpretation of primary and secondary sources. 3. Develop a clear sense of chronology, past, present, and future in order to identify the sequence in which events occurred and recognize cause and effect relationships 4. Conduct research by locating, gathering, and organizing information to present orally and in writing by using appropriate technology resources to support learning.
u1265 (x=108) Eighth Grade, Standard 1. History
=== page 104 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.95 | SS.8.2.1]
u1268 SOCIAL STUDIES Eighth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
u1269 Prepared Graduates: 3. Apply geographic representations and perspectives to analyze human movement, spatial patterns, systems, and the connections and relationships among them.
u1270 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Use geographic tools to research and analyze patterns in human and physical systems in the United States.
u1272 (x=414) Inquiry Questions: 1. How have human settlement and migration patterns influenced and changed cultural characteristics and environmental systems? 2. How can geographic tools help explore patterns of continuity and change in human and physical systems? 3. How is human activity limited by the environment? 4. How have humans adapted to and changed the physical environment?
u1273 (x=54) Students Can: a. Interpret primary and secondary geographic sources to analyze a historic
u1274 (x=68) issue. For example: Using both historical and contemporary maps to understand the changes in American boundaries. b. Identify the spatial distribution of cultural groups and human migration
u1275 (x=68) patterns. c. Recognize patterns of land acquisition and apply to events of the past. d. Compare the relationship between human settlement and the environment
u1276 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers recognize concepts of land and spatial representation to analyze and solve geographic and historical problems. 2. Geographic thinkers apply spatial reasoning to understand historical events. 3. Geographic thinkers use cognitive skills fundamental to spatial thinking by combining spatial visualization, spatial orientation, and spatial relation including recognition of spatial distributions and patterns to connect locations and associate and correlate spatially distributed phenomena. 4. Geographic thinkers respond to historical and spatial literature, including diverse narratives, to understand issues from a spatial perspective.
u1277 (x=68) to recognize important regional connections to early U.S. historical events. e. Calculate and analyze population trends in relation to historical
u1278 (x=68) phenomena.
u1280 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Interpret information and draw conclusions using demographic information based on the best analysis to understand patterns of change in human and physical systems (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Synthesize ideas in insightful or innovative ways to demonstrate understanding of demographic patterns of movement and their impact upon the physical systems of the United States (Creativity and Innovation). 3. Organize geographic information using technologies to develop greater understanding of a historical event or action (Media Literacy, Data Literacy). 4. Demonstrate ways to adapt and reach workable solutions when considering the use of limited resources and their impact upon political and historical events (Adaptability and Flexibility).
u1281 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Integrate visual information (e.g., in charts, graphs, photographs, videos, or maps) with other information in print and digital texts. 2. Apply reading and writing strategies to construct and express knowledge. 3. Construct and interpret visual representations of geographic information. 4. Apply analysis of geographic data to logically interpret historical phenomena and sources.
u1282 (x=108) Eighth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 105 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.96 | SS.8.2.2]
u1286 SOCIAL STUDIES Eighth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
u1287 Prepared Graduates: 4. Examine the characteristics of places and regions, and the changing nature among geographic and human interactions.
u1288 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Recognize the impact of the competition for control of land and resources in early American history.
u1290 (x=414) 4. Demonstrate ways to adapt and reach workable solutions in understanding differing perspectives over use of resources and space (Adaptability and Flexibility).
u1291 (x=54) Students Can: a. Analyze the push and pull factors that shaped immigration to and migration
u1292 (x=68) within the early United States. For example: Economic opportunities, religious refuge, and forced migration. b. Analyze patterns of conflict and cooperation that resulted from human
u1293 (x=414) Inquiry Questions: 1. How will the location of resources lead to cooperation or conflict in the future? 2. How has conflict over land and resources impacted human migration of various ethnic and cultural groups across Colorado and North America? 3. How have differing perspectives regarding resource and land use, occupancy, and ownership led to cooperative policies or conflict? 4. How would human settlement patterns be different if people did not trade resources with others?
u1294 (x=68) migration and the economic, political, ethnic, and social implications of those interactions. c. Compare how differing geographic perspectives apply to a historic issue. d. Interpret geographic and environmental data to understand how
u1295 (x=68) competition over land and resources shaped the development of the early United States. For example: Establishing the Mason/Dixon line, development of railroads, the Louisiana Purchase, and the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.
u1296 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers evaluate the allocation of resources and the use of land to understand relationships. 2. Geographic thinkers recognize that different perspectives affect cooperation and conflict over space and resources.
u1298 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Interpret information and draw conclusions as geographers based on the best analysis to recognize and understand the processes that interact in shaping human population patterns and historical events (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Synthesize ideas in original and surprising ways while comparing differing geographic perspectives (Creativity and Innovation). 3. Act on creative ideas to make a tangible and useful contribution to analyze and explain interdependence, cooperation, and conflict over land and resources in early American history (Perseverance and Resilience).
u1299 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Cite specific textual evidence to support analysis of primary and secondary sources. 2. Distinguish among fact, opinion, and reasoned judgment in a text. 3. Read to identify cause-and-effect relationships, to compare and contrast information, identify fact and opinion, and determine author bias. 4. Evaluate the accuracy, relevance, appropriateness, and bias of online and print sources. 5. Identify propaganda, censorship, and bias in the media.
u1300 (x=108) Eighth Grade, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 106 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.97 | SS.8.3.1]
u1304 SOCIAL STUDIES Eighth Grade, Standard 3. Economics
u1305 Prepared Graduates: 5. Evaluate how scarce resources are allocated in societies through the analysis of individual choice, market interaction, and public policy.
u1306 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Investigate how economic freedom, including free trade, was important for economic growth in early American history.
u1308 Students Can: a. Give examples of regional, national, and international differences in resources, productivity, and costs that provide a basis for trade. b. Describe the factors that lead to a region or nation having a comparative and absolute advantage in trade. For example: The American System proposed by Henry
u1309 Clay. c. Explain the effects of domestic policies on international trade. d. Explain why nations sometimes restrict trade by using quotas, tariffs, and nontariff barriers.
u1311 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Make predictions and design data/information collection and analysis strategies concerning economic policy through evaluation of historical events (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Apply knowledge and skills as an economist and citizen to implement sophisticated, appropriate, and workable solutions to address complex global problems using interdisciplinary perspectives independently or with others in order to inform public policy (Global and Cultural Awareness). 3. Educate and inspire others using sound economic understandings to evaluate economic policy and inform economic decisions based upon consideration of past experiences (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u1312 Inquiry Questions: 1. How do societies benefit from trade and exchange? 2. Why is it important for nations to control trade and exchange? 3. What are the benefits and challenges of trade at the individual, local, state, national, and international levels? 4. How does where and how you purchase products affect the cultural, social, economic, and environmental conditions? 5. What impact upon productivity results from taxation? 6. What concerns do citizens have with taxation? 7. What was the economic impact on citizens of the United States after leaving British rule? 8. How did regional interests impact political leaders’ positions on slavery and economic policy?
u1313 (x=108) Eighth Grade, Standard 3. Economics
=== page 107 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.98]
u1317 Nature and Skills of Economics: 1. Economic thinkers choose wisely to get the most from limited resources. They understand that trade and collaboration within a market economy is important to business and individual success. 2. Economic thinkers understand that economic actions have indirect as well as direct effects and it is important to analyze positive and negative impacts of trade agreements as critical to a nation’s success. 3. Economic thinkers understand that technological advances aid businesses in operating efficiently. 4. Economic thinkers analyze the components of economic growth in market economies because economic theories can be used to predict consequences. 5. Economic thinkers understand that economic actions have both direct and indirect effects on people living in poverty, children, the disabled, ethnic, and religious groups who may not have a voice in decision-making.
u1318 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Gather information by taking notes, making outlines, and creating graphic organizers. 2. Read texts by using reading strategies (i.e., prior knowledge, key vocabulary words, context clues, main ideas, supporting details, and text features: pictures, maps, text boxes). 3. Formulate appropriate research questions. 4. Draw evidence from informational texts to support analysis reflections, and research.
u1319 (x=108) Eighth Grade, Standard 3. Economics
=== page 108 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.99 | SS.8.4.1]
u1322 SOCIAL STUDIES Eighth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
u1323 Prepared Graduates: 6. Express an understanding of how civic participation affects policy by applying the rights and responsibilities of a citizen.
u1324 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Construct an understanding of the changing definition of citizenship and the expansion of rights of citizens in the United States.
u1326 Students Can: a. Describe major political and/or social changes that affected the definition of citizenship, expanded or restricted the rights of citizens, and how those changes
u1327 impacted women, Indigenous Peoples, African Americans, Latinos, Asian Americans, LGBTQ, religious minorities, and people living in annexed territories. b. Analyze the relationship between the debate about citizenship and national identity in early U.S History, and how those ideas shaped political institutions and
u1328 society. c. Compare how the leadership of various individuals has influenced the United States government and politics. For example: Women, American Indians, African
u1329 Americans, and people in the unsettled territories. d. Evaluate the results of various strategies used to enact political change over time. e. Analyze primary sources supporting democratic freedoms and the founding of our government and explain how they provide for both continuity and change.
u1330 Including but not limited to: the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, Bill of Rights, and the Declaration of Sentiments. f. Examine ways members of society may effectively and civilly voice opinions, monitor government, and bring about change on a local, state, and national level, and
u1331 which could have global implications.
u1333 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Make connections as citizens between information gathered and personal experiences to apply and/or test solutions to analyze citizenship and examine the individual role in government (Civic Engagement). 2. Apply knowledge as citizens to set goals, make informed decisions and transfer to new contexts about the roles and responsibilities of individual citizens (Civic Engagement).
u1334 Inquiry Questions: 1. How have citizens and groups influenced change? 2. What are the roles and responsibilities for citizens? 3. What are the various ways that the government may respond to civic voice and participation? 4. How has civic participation impacted the development of government and civil rights in America? 5. What is more effective, diplomacy or debate? 6. How have political parties formed and changed over time?
u1335 (x=108) Eighth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 109 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.100]
u1339 7. How have Americans fought to preserve their rights, outlined in the Bill of Rights, and when the government violated those rights?
u1340 Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals distinguish the powers and responsibilities of citizens, political parties, interest groups, and the media in a variety of government and non- governmental contexts. 2. Civic-minded individuals explain specific roles played by citizens. For example: Voters, jurors, taxpayers, members of the armed forces, petitioners, protesters, and officeholders. 3. Civic-minded individuals examine the origins, purposes, and impact of constitutions, laws, treaties, and international agreements. 4. Civic-minded individuals explain the powers and limits of the three branches of government, public officials, and bureaucracies at different levels in the United States and in other countries.
u1341 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Use content-specific technology tools to support learning and research. 2. Use effective decision-making and problem-solving skills in public and private life. 3. Accept and demonstrate civic responsibility for the well-being of oneself, family, and the community. 4. Conduct research by locating, gathering, organizing information and data, and evaluating online and print resources. 5. Demonstrate positive social and ethical behaviors when using technology and discuss consequences of inappropriate use. 6. Compares and contrasts evidence from multiple sources to seek, find, and prove corroboration.
u1342 (x=108) Eighth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 110 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.101 | SS.8.4.2]
u1345 SOCIAL STUDIES Eighth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
u1346 Prepared Graduates: 7. Analyze the origins, structures, and functions of governments to evaluate the impact on citizens and the global society.
u1347 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Investigate and evaluate the purpose and place of rule of law in a constitutional system.
u1349 Students Can: a. Evaluate the strengths of rule of law. b. Explain the role and importance of the Constitution and the strength of amendments made during this time period. Including but not limited to: the Bill of Rights,
u1350 and the 13th, 14th, and 15th Amendments. c. Apply knowledge about the three branches of government and how they interact with one another to historical and contemporary problems. d. Evaluate the historical significance of the Declaration of Independence. e. Discuss the tensions between individual rights and liberties with state, tribal, and national laws. f. Explain how the state and federal courts’ power of judicial review is reflected in the United States’ form of constitutional government. For example: Marbury v.
u1351 Madison. g. Use a variety of resources, including Supreme Court decisions, to identify and evaluate issues that involve civic responsibility, individual rights, and the common
u1352 good.
u1354 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Make connections as citizens between information gathered and personal experiences to apply and/or test solutions to analyze the structures and functions of government (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Connect knowledge as citizens from personal ideas/understandings to civic engagement about the origins, structures, and functions of governments (Civic Engagement).
u1355 Inquiry Questions: 1. What is the “common good?” 2. What are key court cases and historical events in the development of the United States? 3. How have landmark Supreme Court cases impacted society? 4. How does civil discourse contribute to the resolution of conflicts? 5. How has the United States balanced individual rights and law? 6. How does discussion and consensus building contribute to the development of a decision? 7. How does the U.S. Constitution provide for the rule of law, separation of power, and popular sovereignty?
u1356 (x=108) Eighth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 111 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.102]
u1360 8. Who is included and who is excluded in the clause, “All men are created equal,” which is written in the Declaration of Independence?” How true was this clause at the time it was written?
u1361 Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals read diverse sources to create understanding, critically analyze issues, and place them in historical context. 2. Civic-minded individuals understand and discuss the dynamic nature of national government and the individual’s role in the process. 3. Civic-minded individuals understand that all forms of discrimination based on race have been illegal for almost three generations.
u1362 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Use content specific technology tools to support learning and research. 2. Use effective decision-making and problem-solving skills in public and private life. 3. Accept responsibility for the well-being of oneself, family, and the community. 4. Apply social studies content and skills to real life situations.
u1363 (x=108) Eighth Grade, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 112 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.103 | SS.8.5.1]
u1366 SOCIAL STUDIES Eighth Grade, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u1367 Prepared Graduates: 8. Apply economic reasoning skills to make informed personal financial decisions.
u1368 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Examine the role of consumer decisions and taxes within the market economies of early American history.
u1370 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Economics (PFL): 1. Financially capable individuals apply the economic way of thinking which assumes that people make choices because they are responding to the underlying incentives. 2. Financially capable individuals study factors that lead to increased economic interdependence, increased productivity, and improved standard of living for the individuals in a society. 3. Financially capable individuals understand that there is an economic role for government in a market economy whenever the benefits of a government policy outweigh its costs.
u1371 (x=54) Students Can: a. Calculate how the value of money has changed over time impacting
u1372 (x=68) earning, spending, borrowing, and investing. For example: Inflation and recession. b. Explain factors that have impacted borrowing and investing over time. For
u1373 (x=68) example: Currency stability, stocks, and banking practices. c. Analyze the changes in the development of human capital over time. For
u1374 (x=68) example: Gaining knowledge and skill through education, apprenticeship, entrepreneurship, and work experience. d. Analyze the impact of taxes on the people of the United States over time.
u1375 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Analyze how and why individuals, events, and ideas develop and interact over the course of the text. 2. Explain how a question represents key ideas in the field. 3. Explain points of agreement experts have about interpretations and applications of disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a compelling question. 4. Analyze and use information presented visually in a text. For example: Graphs, charts, flowcharts, diagrams, models, tables, that support the words in a text.
u1377 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Investigate to form hypotheses, make observations, and draw conclusions (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Interpret information and draw conclusions based on the best analysis (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u1378 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. What role did taxes play in the birth of our nation? 2. What would countries look like without taxes? 3. How has the value of money changed over time and what is the impact on consumerism? 4. How did inventions impact personal financial options?
u1379 (x=108) Eighth Grade, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
=== page 113 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.104]
u1383 SOCIAL STUDIES High School, Standard 1. History
u1384 Prepared Graduates: 1. Apply the process of inquiry to examine and analyze how historical knowledge is viewed, constructed, and interpreted.
u1385 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Apply the historical method of inquiry to formulate compelling questions, evaluate primary and secondary sources, analyze and interpret data, and argue for an interpretation defended by textual evidence.
u1387 Students Can: a. Formulate compelling and supporting questions after evaluating primary sources for point of view and historical context. b. Gather and analyze historical information to address questions from a range of primary and secondary sources containing a variety of perspectives. For example:
u1388 Perspectives of historically underrepresented groups. c. Gather and analyze historical information from a range of qualitative and quantitative sources. For example: Demographic, economic, social, and political data. d. Construct and defend a historical argument that evaluates interpretations by analyzing, critiquing, and synthesizing evidence from a wide range of relevant historical
u1389 sources.
u1391 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Articulate thoughts and ideas effectively using oral, written, and nonverbal communication skills in a variety of forms and contexts, including multilingual (Interpersonal Communication). 2. Interpret, analyze, and draw conclusions using historical sources (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 3. Synthesize ideas in original and innovative ways (Creativity and Innovation).
u1392 Inquiry Questions: 1. How does the point of view of a historian affect how history is interpreted? 2. Do historians come to agreement on the historical significance of events? If so, how? 3. How does studying a variety of perspectives allow us to construct a more complete record of the past? 4. Why are historical questions important? 5. How do historical thinkers use primary and secondary sources to formulate historical arguments? 6. How might historical inquiry be used to better understand and make decisions about contemporary issues?
u1393 Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers use questions generated about multiple historical sources to pursue further inquiry and investigate additional sources. 2. Historical thinkers evaluate historical sources for audience, purpose, point of view, context, and authenticity.
u1394 (x=108) High School, Standard 1. History
u1397 (x=54) SS.HS.1.1
=== page 114 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.105]
u1398 3. Historical thinkers use primary and secondary sources to evaluate and develop hypotheses and diverse interpretations of historical events and figures and patterns and trends. 4. Historical thinkers evaluate the credibility of a source by examining how experts value the source. 5. Historical thinkers use information and context to interpret, evaluate, and inform decisions or policies regarding such issues which societies find contentious or worthy of debate and discussion. 6. Historical thinkers consider what perspectives or information is left out of an argument and why that might be important to know. 7. Historical thinkers understand that societal values change over time; therefore, a period of time under study should not be judged using present day values.
u1399 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Cite specific textual evidence to support analysis of primary and secondary sources, connecting insights gained from specific details to an understanding of a text as a whole. 2. Evaluate various explanations for actions or events and determine which explanation best accords with textual evidence, acknowledging where the text leaves matters uncertain. 3. Analyze in detail how a complex primary and/or secondary source is structured, including how key sentences, paragraphs, and larger portions of the text contribute to the whole. 4. Evaluate historians’ differing points of view on the same historical event or issue by assessing the authors’ claims, reasoning, and evidence. 5. Conduct short as well as more sustained research projects to answer a question (including a self-generated question) or solve a problem; narrow or broaden the inquiry when appropriate; synthesize multiple sources on the subject, demonstrating understanding of the subject under investigation. 6. Individually and with others, students construct compelling questions, and explain points of agreement and disagreement about interpretations and applications of disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a compelling question. 7. Explain how compelling questions contribute to an inquiry and how, through engaging source work, new compelling and supporting questions emerge. 8. Interpret, analyze, and detect bias in historical sources. 9. Write content-specific arguments in which they state a claim, provide evidence from texts and sources to support the claim, and organize the evidence in well- reasoned, meaningful ways. 10. Integrate multimedia as effective tools for presenting and clarifying information.
u1400 (x=108) High School, Standard 1. History
=== page 115 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.106]
u1403 SOCIAL STUDIES High School, Standard 1. History
u1404 Prepared Graduates: 2. Analyze historical time periods and patterns of continuity and change, through multiple perspectives, within and among cultures and societies.
u1405 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Analyze and evaluate key concepts of continuity and change, cause and effect, complexity, unity and diversity, and significant ideas in the United States from Reconstruction to the present.
u1407 Students Can: a. Analyze continuity and change over the course of United States history. Including but not limited to: The expansion and limitations of rights, the balance between
u1408 liberty and security, shifts in internationalist and isolationist policies, debates over the role of government, and the impacts of expansionist policies. b. Investigate causes and effects of significant events throughout United States history. For example: World and national conflicts (e.g., Spanish American War, the
u1409 continued conflict over Indigenous lands, and the Tulsa Massacre), urbanization and suburbanization (e.g., Great Migration and Levittown), economic cycles (e.g., The Great Depression and the 2008 Great Recession), and both popular and counterculture movements. c. Analyze the complexity of events throughout United States history. For example: The Civil Rights Movement (e.g., Double V Campaign, the Voting Rights Act of 1965,
u1410 and the Stonewall Riots); migration, immigration, and displacement (e.g., immigration and citizenship legislation, Japanese American incarceration, and debates over tribal sovereignty); landmark court cases (e.g., Keyes v. School District #1 Denver, Brown v. Board of Education, and Obergefell v. Hodges), and the war on terror (e.g., 9/11, Afghanistan and Iraq wars, Middle Eastern discrimination, and the evolution of U.S. counterterrorism efforts). d. Examine and evaluate issues of unity and diversity from Reconstruction to present. For example: The systemic impact of racism and nativism (e.g., Jim Crow,
u1411 affirmative action, and mass incarceration), the definition and role of patriotism, expansion and limitations of rights, and the role of religion. e. Investigate the historical development and impact of major scientific and technological innovations in the Industrial Age, the Space Age, and the Digital Age. For
u1412 example: Scientific innovations by diverse individuals, creation of mass production/assembly line process, creation of the atomic bomb, NASA, and the introduction of mass media and the Internet. f. Evaluate the historical development and impact of political thought, theory, and actions. For example: Shifts in the platforms of political parties, expansion and
u1413 limitations of suffrage, and the impact of various reform and socio-cultural movements. g. Analyze how opposing perspectives, compromise, and cooperation have shaped national unity and diversity. For example: The rights and contributions of diverse
u1414 groups and individuals, including African Americans, Latinos, Asian Americans, Indigenous Peoples, LGBTQ individuals, women, immigrants, individuals with disabilities, and ethnic and religious minorities, and the role of organizations and government in advancing these rights (e.g., NAACP, American Indian Movement, and United Farm Workers). h. Analyze and evaluate ideas critical to the understanding of American history. Including but not limited to: populism, progressivism, isolationism, imperialism,
u1415 capitalism, racism, extremism, nationalism, patriotism, anti-communism, environmentalism, liberalism, fundamentalism, and conservatism.
u1416 (x=108) High School, Standard 1. History
u1419 (x=54) SS.HS.1.2
=== page 116 === [running header: Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.107]
u1420 i. Describe and analyze the historical development and impact of the arts and literature on the culture of the United States. Including but not limited to: the writings
u1421 of the Muckrakers, political cartoons, Americana, the Harlem Renaissance, the Lost Generation, Jazz, Rock and Roll, protest songs and American literature. j. Examine and evaluate how the United States was involved in and responded to international events over the course of history. Including but not limited to: the
u1422 World Wars, the Holocaust, the Nuremburg trials, Cold War policies, Berlin Airlift, Korean War, Vietnam War, and the genocides in Bosnia and Darfur.
u1424 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Make predictions and design data/information collection and analysis strategies to test historical hypotheses (Critical Thinking and Analysis, Data Literacy). 2. Apply knowledge and skills to implement sophisticated, appropriate, and workable solutions to address complex national problems using interdisciplinary perspectives independently or with others (Global and Cultural Awareness, Creativity and Innovation).
u1425 Inquiry Questions: 1. How does society decide what is important in United States history? 2. What ideas have united and divided the American people over time? 3. How does the consideration of multiple perspectives enable us to better understand change over time? 4. How have efforts to expand rights overcome barriers over the course of United States history? 5. Why is it important to understand the positive contributions made by the United States of America in advancing human freedom and prosperity? 6. How has the United States’ response to human rights abuses at home and abroad differed over time? 7. Why is it important to understand the contribution of the United States to the defeat of fascism and totalitarianism in World War II and the contribution made to the rebuilding of Europe through the Marshall Plan? 8. Why is it important to understand the contribution of the United States of America to the defense of democratic governments during the Cold War?
u1426 Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers understand that the ability to negotiate the complex relationships among change, diversity, and unity throughout United States history, is an essential attribute for success in a more interconnected world. 2. Historical thinkers understand that the ability to negotiate the complex interrelationship among political, social, and cultural institutions throughout United States history, is essential to participation in the economic life of a free society and our civic institutions. 3. Historical thinkers analyze historical, contemporary, and emerging means of changing societies, promoting the common good, and protecting rights. 4. Historical thinkers analyze how historical events and spatial diffusion of ideas, technology, and cultural practices have influenced historical events. 5. Historical thinkers analyze The Civil Rights Movement from 1954 to 1968, the natural rights and principles that the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King used to inform his leadership of The Civil Rights Movement, and the tactics and strategies of non-violence resistance he championed in response to the Jim Crow laws of that era. 6. Historical thinkers understand the founding principles upon which Dr. Martin Luther King’s “I Have a Dream” speech were founded, specifically, “I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character.”
u1427 (x=108) High School, Standard 1. History
=== page 117 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.108]
u1430 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Determine the meaning of words and phrases as they are used in a text, including vocabulary describing political, social, or economic aspects of history/social science. 2. Compare the point of view of two or more authors for how they treat the same or similar topics, including which details they include and emphasize in their respective accounts. 3. Write informative/explanatory texts, including the narration of historical events, scientific procedures/experiments, or technical processes. 4. Write routinely over extended time frames (time for reflection and revision) and shorter time frames (a single sitting or a day or two) for a range of discipline- specific tasks, purposes, and audiences. 5. Evaluate how historical events and developments were shaped by unique circumstances of time and place as well as broader historical contexts. 6. Use questions generated about individuals and groups to assess how the significance of their actions changes over time and is shaped by the historical context. 7. Collaborate with peers, experts, and others using contemporary media to contribute to a content related knowledge base to compile, synthesize, produce, and disseminate information. 8. Engage in civil discourse on historical topics using evidence as a basis for argument formation.
u1431 (x=108) High School, Standard 1. History
=== page 118 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.109]
u1434 SOCIAL STUDIES High School, Standard 1. History
u1435 Prepared Graduates: 2. Analyze historical time periods and patterns of continuity and change, through multiple perspectives, within and among cultures and societies.
u1436 Grade Level Expectation: 3. Analyze and evaluate key concepts of continuity and change, cause and effect, complexity, unity and diversity, and significant ideas throughout the world from the Renaissance to the present.
u1438 (x=414) c. Analyze the complexity of events from the Renaissance to the present. For
u1439 (x=428) example: Religious rifts (e.g., the Protestant Reformation, the Shiite/Sunni split in Islam), industrialization, imperialism (e.g., spheres of influence and colonialism), independence movements in Africa, the Americas, and Asia; globalization, the rise of nationalism, and domestic and international terrorism. d. Examine and evaluate issues of unity and diversity in world history from the
u1440 (x=54) Students Can: a. Evaluate continuity and change over the course of world history. For
u1441 (x=68) example: Social and political movements related to nationality, ethnicity, and gender; revolutions; the World Wars; the Cold War; independence movements/decolonization and 19th, 20th and 21st century genocides such as the Armenian Genocide; the Holocaust perpetrated by the fascist German Nazi Party (National Socialist German Workers Party) and its collaborators; the Sand Creek Massacre, Cambodian Genocide; the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics murder of Ukrainian nationals; genocides conducted by the Communist Party of China (CPC) against its political opponents during the Totalization Period, Collectivization, the Great Leap Forward, the Cultural Revolution, and Mao’s Famine; and the current genocide of the Uyghurs; as well as genocides that have taken place in Rwanda, Darfur and Bosnia. b. Investigate causes and effects of significant events from the Renaissance to
u1442 (x=428) Renaissance to the present. For example: Migration and immigration (e.g., rapid global population growth), colonialism and the resulting changes in political geography, anti-colonial and nationalist movements, imperialism, world conferences and international agreements (e.g., Berlin Conference, United Nations, and Bandung Conference), and human rights issues. e. Evaluate the historical development and impact of philosophical and
u1443 (x=428) political movements and belief systems. Including but not limited to: the Enlightenment, humanism, communism, socialism, and the development and expansion of Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, Sikhism, and Taoism. f. Investigate the historical development and impact of major scientific and
u1444 (x=68) the present. Including but not limited to: the Renaissance, the Protestant Reformation, the Industrial Revolution, the French, Russian, Chinese, and Latin American Revolutions, the World Wars, and the Arab Spring movement.
u1445 (x=428) technological innovations. For example: The Industrial Age (e.g., the British factory system), the Space Age (e.g., Sputnik), and scientific advancements such as the printing press, vaccinations, nuclear power, and the Internet. g. Describe and analyze the historical development and impact of the arts and
u1446 literature on the cultures of the world. For example: The Renaissance, Modernism, and the use of art and literature as a form of both social progress and resistance.
u1447 (x=108) High School, Standard 1. History
u1450 (x=54) SS.HS.1.3
=== page 119 === [running header: Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.110]
u1452 (x=414) 3. Historical thinkers analyze historical, contemporary, and emerging means of changing societies, promoting the common good, and protecting rights. 4. Historical thinkers analyze how historical events and spatial diffusion of ideas, technology, and cultural practices have influenced migration patterns and the distribution of human population.
u1453 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Make predictions and design data/information collection and analysis strategies to test historical hypotheses (Critical Thinking and Analysis, Data Literacy). 2. Apply knowledge and skills to implement sophisticated, appropriate, and workable solutions to address complex global problems using interdisciplinary perspectives independently or with others (Global and Cultural Awareness, Creativity and Innovation).
u1454 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Determine the meaning of words and phrases as they are used in a text, including vocabulary describing political, social, or economic aspects of history/social science. 2. Compare the point of view of two or more authors for how they treat the same or similar topics, including which details they include and emphasize in their respective accounts. 3. Write informative/explanatory texts, including the narration of historical events, scientific procedures/experiments, or technical processes. 4. Write routinely over extended time frames (time for reflection and revision) and shorter time frames (a single sitting or a day or two) for a range of discipline-specific tasks, purposes, and audiences. 5. Evaluate how historical events and developments were shaped by unique circumstances of time and place as well as broader historical contexts. 6. Use questions generated about individuals and groups to assess how the significance of their actions changes over time and is shaped by the historical context. 7. Collaborate with peers, experts, and others using contemporary media to contribute to a content related knowledge base to compile, synthesize, produce, and disseminate information. 8. Engage in civil discourse on historical topics using evidence as a basis for argument formation.
u1455 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. How have different cultures influenced world history? 2. How do historians work from/with cultural assumptions to decide what is important in world history? 3. What ideas transcend cultural, political, economic, and social differences in world history? 4. How does cultural, political, economic, and social diversity affect perceptions of change over time? 5. How are human rights violated and prosecuted in a world of different nations and cultures? 6. What role has censorship, propaganda, and media control played in modern genocides and other acts of mass violence? 7. How did Indigenous Peoples respond to and experience colonization?
u1456 (x=54) Nature and Skills of History: 1. Historical thinkers understand that the ability to negotiate the complex relationships among change, diversity, and unity throughout world history is an essential attribute for success in a more interconnected world. 2. Historical thinkers understand that the ability to analyze the significance of interactions among eras, ideas, individuals, and groups is an essential skill in an increasingly globalizing world.
u1457 9.
u1458 (x=108) High School, Standard 1. History
=== page 120 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.111]
u1461 SOCIAL STUDIES High School, Standard 2. Geography
u1462 Prepared Graduates: 3. Apply geographic representations and perspectives to analyze human movement, spatial patterns, systems, and the connections and relationships among them.
u1463 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Use geographic tools and resources to analyze Earth’s human systems and physical features to investigate and address geographic issues.
u1465 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers understand how geographic reasoning brings societies and nature under the lens of spatial analysis, and aids in personal and societal decision making and problem solving. 2. Geographic thinkers gather, display, and analyze geographic information using geographic tools. 3. Geographic thinkers use absolute and relative location, mental maps, and spatial orientation in studying geographic questions. 4. Geographic thinkers predict how human activities will help shape Earth’s surface and ways that people might cooperate and compete for use of Earth’s resources.
u1466 (x=54) Students Can: a. Analyze variations in spatial patterns of cultural and environmental
u1467 (x=68) characteristics at multiple scales while gathering geographic data from a variety of valid sources. For example: Maps, Geographic Information Systems (GIS), graphs, and charts. b. Create and interpret maps to display and explain the spatial patterns of
u1468 (x=68) cultural and environmental characteristics using geospatial and related technologies. c. Evaluate relationships between the locations of places and regions and
u1469 (x=68) their political, cultural, and economic relationships using maps, satellite images, photographs, and other representations.
u1470 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Integrate and evaluate content presented in diverse media and formats. 2. Determine what a text states, make inferences, and cite specific textual evidence. 3. Formulate appropriate research questions. 4. Conduct research by gathering, organizing, and evaluating the credibility and bias of information from a variety of online, print, and non-print sources. 5. Analyze privacy policies in relation to the use of various websites as geographic tools. For example: Cookies, data, and location tracking. 6. Integrate accessibility principles to effectively communicate and meet the needs of one’s audience. 7. Understand how laws and rules apply to digital content and information.
u1472 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Interpret geographic information and draw conclusions based on geo- spatial reasonings (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Apply results of analysis to make a tangible and useful contribution to diverse communities (Civic Engagement).
u1473 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. What is the significance of spatial orientation, place, and location? 2. How have the tools of a geographer changed over time? 3. What can various types of data tell us about a place? 4. How can geographers support an argument with evidence? 5. Why is the concept of “where” important in the study of geography?
u1474 8.
u1475 (x=108) High School, Standard 2. Geography
u1478 (x=54) SS.HS.2.1
=== page 121 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.112]
u1479 SOCIAL STUDIES High School, Standard 2. Geography
u1480 Prepared Graduates: 4. Examine the characteristics of places and regions, and the changing nature among geographic and human interactions.
u1481 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Make connections among geographic variables that influence the interactions of people, places, and environments.
u1483 Students Can: a. Identify, evaluate, and communicate strategies to respond to constraints placed on human systems by the physical environment. b. Analyze, interpret, and predict the influences of migration and the distribution of human populations based on reciprocal patterns. For example: Historical events,
u1484 the spatial diffusion of ideas, technologies, and cultural practices. c. Examine patterns of distribution and arrangements of settlements and the processes of the diffusion of human activities. For example: Urban/rural, regional, and
u1485 transportation patterns. d. Explain how altering the environment has brought prosperity to some places and created environmental dilemmas for others. e. Research and interpret viewpoints from diverse groups. Including but not limited to: African Americans, Latinos, Asian Americans, Hawaiian/Pacific Islander,
u1486 Indigenous Peoples, LGBTQ, and religious minorities’ perspectives on issues that shape policies and programs for resource use and sustainability. For example: Immigration, resource distribution, universal human rights and the UN Sustainable Development Goals. f. Evaluate the influence of long-term climate variability on human migration and settlement patterns, resource use, and land uses at local-to-global scales.
u1488 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Apply geographic knowledge and skills to implement sophisticated, appropriate, and workable ideas to address complex geographic interactions among multiple diverse groups using interdisciplinary perspectives independently or with others (Global and Cultural Awareness). 2. Interpret geographic variables and draw conclusions based on geo-spatial analysis (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 3. Design data/information collection and analysis strategies to facilitate geographic inquiry (Critical Thinking and Analysis, Creativity and Innovation).
u1489 Inquiry Questions: 1. How might the physical geography of Earth change in the future? 2. How might people and societies respond to changes in the physical environment? 3. What are the maximum limits of human activity the environment can withstand without deterioration? 4. What are push and pull factors that impact migration?
u1490 Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers study how the physical environment is modified by human activities, including how human societies value and use natural resources. 2. Geographic thinkers evaluate major areas of environmental and societal interaction.
u1491 (x=108) High School, Standard 2. Geography
u1494 (x=54) SS.HS.2.2
=== page 122 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.113]
u1495 3. Geographic thinkers understand that individual actions affect the local environment and global community such as the impact of recycling and consumption of resources. 4. Geographic thinkers understand how technology can support invention and influence how humans modify the environment in both positive and negative ways. For example: The renovation of existing buildings to “green” technologies, the prevention and prediction of natural hazards and disasters, and the use of satellite imagery to track water availability in the Middle East.
u1496 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Integrate and evaluate content presented in diverse media and formats. 2. Determine what text states, make inferences, and cite specific textual evidence. 3. Read for a specific purpose. For example: Detect cause-and-effect relationships, compare and contrast information, identify fact and opinion, and author bias. 4. Process and effectively communicate and present information orally, in writing, and through development of websites, multimedia presentations, and other forms of technology.
u1497 (x=108) High School, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 123 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.114]
u1500 SOCIAL STUDIES High School, Standard 2. Geography
u1501 Prepared Graduates: 4. Examine the characteristics of places and regions, and the changing nature among geographic and human interactions.
u1502 Grade Level Expectation: 3. Investigate patterns of the interconnected nature of the world, its people, and places.
u1504 Students Can: a. Explain how the uneven distribution of resources in the world can lead to conflict, competition, or cooperation among nations, regions, and cultural groups. b. Explain how shifts in the world’s population are connected to and dependent upon other people for both human and natural resources. c. Explain how migration of people and movement of goods and ideas can contribute to and enrich cultures, but also create tensions. d. Analyze how culture, and cooperation and conflict influence both the division and unification of Earth. For example: International agreements, political patterns,
u1505 national boundaries, and how cultural differences and conflict over land may lead to genocide. e. Make predictions and draw conclusions about the positive and negative global impact of cultural diffusion and assimilation. For example: Human rights, language,
u1506 religion, and ethnicity. f. Examine geographic concepts through the lens of multiple diverse perspectives from various regions of the world and with consideration for indigenous, dominant,
u1507 and marginalized populations. Including but not limited to: Indigenous Peoples in Colorado, Christians in the Middle East, the Uyghurs in China, and tribal groups in Afghanistan.
u1509 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Apply knowledge and skills to implement sophisticated, appropriate, and workable solutions to address complex global problems using interdisciplinary perspectives independently or with others (Global and Cultural Awareness). 2. Apply a fundamental understanding of the ethical/legal issues in the interconnected nature of the world for effective civic participation (Social Awareness, Civic Engagement). 3. Interpret geographic information and draw conclusions based on geo-spatial analysis (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 4. Develop and apply knowledge, skills, and habits gained from experiences to address issues, affect change, and/or solve problems (Civic Engagement).
u1510 Inquiry Questions: 1. What is the role of people in the world? 2. How does globalization influence the interactions of people on Earth? 3. How do cooperation and conflict influence the division and control of the social, economic, and political spaces on Earth? 4. What does it mean to support human rights? 5. What predictions can be made about human migration patterns?
u1511 (x=108) High School, Standard 2. Geography
u1514 (x=54) SS.HS.2.3
=== page 124 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.115]
u1515 6. How do technologies influence both positive and negative social change and modern movements as a result of the increasing speed and global reach of social networking?
u1516 Nature and Skills of Geography: 1. Geographic thinkers evaluate global systems such as culture, diffusion, interdependence, migration, population pyramids, regional alliances, development of competition and trade, and the impact of population changes on society. 2. Geographic thinkers study the interconnection between physical processes and human activities that help shape the Earth’s surface. 3. Geographic thinkers analyze how people’s lives and identities are rooted in time and place. 4. Geographic thinkers understand that the world is geographically interconnected, affecting daily life in such ways as the spread of disease, global impact of modern technology, and the impact of cultural diffusion. 5. Geographic thinkers understand that the responsible use of technology creates new life choices, new interconnections between people, new opportunities, and unintended consequences. 6. Geographic thinkers make predictions and apply knowledge to evaluate economic systems, political systems, and social systems by measuring the desirability of each society and/or country based on human migration patterns.
u1517 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Integrate and evaluate content presented in diverse media and formats. 2. Determine what text states, make inferences, and cite specific textual evidence. 3. Evaluate the hypotheses, data, analysis, and conclusions in a science or technical text, verifying the data when possible and corroborating or challenging conclusions with other sources of information. 4. Synthesize information from a range of sources such as texts, experiments, and simulations into a coherent understanding of a process, phenomenon, or concept, resolving conflicting information, when possible. 5. Analyze the reliability of information, claims, and sources presented in the various forms of media.
u1518 (x=108) High School, Standard 2. Geography
=== page 125 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.116]
u1521 SOCIAL STUDIES High School, Standard 3. Economics
u1522 Prepared Graduates: 5. Evaluate how scarce resources are allocated in societies through the analysis of individual choice, market interaction, and public policy.
u1523 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Analyze how the scarcity of productive resources (land, labor, capital) forces choices to be made about how individuals, households, businesses, and governments allocate these resources.
u1525 Students Can: a. Explain the economic way of thinking: The condition of scarcity requires choice and choice has a cost (opportunity cost). b. Analyze how the principles of economic thinking influence the choices made by individuals, households, businesses, and governments. Including but not limited to:
u1526 cost vs. benefits, thinking at the margin, incentives matter, trade makes people better off, and future consequences count. c. Analyze how factors of production (land, labor, capital) are brought together to produce goods and services in an economic system.
u1528 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Apply knowledge and skills to analyze how individuals, businesses, and governments deal with the challenges of scarcity (Self-Management, Social Awareness, Global and Cultural Awareness). 2. Identify the incentives that influence individuals, families, businesses, and governments, and draw conclusions based on cost-benefit analysis (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u1529 Inquiry Questions: 1. How does the condition of scarcity affect our decision-making, whether individually or collectively? 2. How might policy makers incentivize responsible personal financial behavior among its citizens? 3. How might policy makers incentivize potential entrepreneurs to address issues of scarcity through innovation and creativity? 4. How is marginal thinking used to make decisions? 5. How are incentives influenced by values? For example: Ethics, religious beliefs, cultural values.
u1530 Nature and Skills of Economics: 1. Economic thinkers realize that, due to scarcity, we must make choices which involve the prioritization of alternatives. 2. Economic thinkers assume that every choice, whether by families, governments, businesses, or individuals, has an opportunity cost. 3. Economic thinkers understand that, using the economic way of thinking, individuals analyze how the benefit of using productive resources for a particular purpose compares with the opportunity cost of this resource use. 4. Economic thinkers apply the economic way of thinking and assume that people make choices because they are responding to the underlying incentives. 5. Economic thinkers realize that the proper analysis to use in decision-making is the marginal benefit and the marginal cost.
u1531 (x=108) High School, Standard 3. Economics
u1534 (x=54) SS.HS.3.1
=== page 126 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.117]
u1535 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Read for a specific purpose (i.e., detect cause-and-effect relationships, compare and contrast information, identify fact vs. opinion, and author bias). 2. Process or synthesize information through writing using note taking, graphic organizers, summaries, proper sequencing of events, and/or formatting thesis statements that examine why as well as how. 3. Create, interpret, and analyze graphs, charts, and diagrams. 4. Process and effectively communicate and present information orally, in writing, and through development of websites, multimedia presentations, and other forms of technology.
u1536 (x=108) High School, Standard 3. Economics
=== page 127 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.118]
u1539 SOCIAL STUDIES High School, Standard 3. Economics
u1540 Prepared Graduates: 5. Evaluate how scarce resources are allocated in societies through the analysis of individual choice, market interaction, and public policy.
u1541 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Evaluate how mixed economic systems, market structures, competition, government policies, and the roles of producers and consumers affect market outcomes.
u1543 Students Can: a. Compare and contrast economic systems in terms of their ability to achieve or impede economic goals. For example: Traditional, command, market, and modern
u1544 mixed economies. b. Use supply and demand analysis to explain how competitive markets efficiently allocate scarce resources. c. Compare and contrast the market outcomes created by various market structures including monopolistic competition, oligopoly, and monopoly. d. Explore the role of government in addressing market failures. For example: Monopoly power/antitrust legislation, public goods, negative/positive externalities, the
u1545 environment, property rights, regulation, access to essential goods and services, and income distribution. e. Compare and contrast different types of taxing. For example: Progressive, regressive, proportional, and marginal vs. average tax rates. f. Explore the multiple roles governments can play dealing with economic crises, including monetary and fiscal policy changes, and reallocation of resources and
u1546 redistribution of wealth. g. Explore how economic crises create an environment where genocide is allowed to occur. For example: Rationing, scapegoating, including the incremental
u1547 dehumanization of minority groups, and mitigating conflict over resources.
u1549 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Manipulate and interpret the tools of supply and demand (Data Literacy). 2. Demonstrate ways different economic systems can answer the basic economic questions of what, how, and for whom to produce goods and services (Social Awareness, Global and Cultural Awareness, Adaptability and Flexibility). 3. Interpret information and draw conclusions about markets based on the supply and demand analysis (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u1550 Inquiry Questions: 1. How do various economic systems make decisions regarding the production and distribution of goods and services? 2. When economic crises occur, does the economic system provide support for all members of the system or is there scapegoating, including the incremental dehumanization of minority groups, and mitigating conflict over resources? 3. What functions do prices serve in a market economy? 4. What are some costs and benefits of embracing a system of supply and demand as a basic allocation mechanism for society?
u1551 (x=108) High School, Standard 3. Economics
u1554 (x=54) SS.HS.3.2
=== page 128 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.119]
u1555 5. How does competition affect the choices consumers have in an economy? 6. What criteria might you use in creating a tax system? 7. What are the pros and cons of various tax systems? 8. What role does economics play in genocide?
u1556 Nature and Skills of Economics: 1. Economic thinkers compare economic systems by analyzing how each addresses the broad economic goals of the society. 2. Economic thinkers use supply and demand analysis to understand how resources are allocated and prices are determined. 3. Economic thinkers analyze the effects of government interference in the market through application of the demand and supply model. 4. Economic thinkers analyze the impact that “imperfectly competitive” markets have on consumers. 5. Economic thinkers investigate the underlying cause of market failures and how to best use government policy to correct the failures. 6. Economic thinkers recognize the importance of evaluating tax structures by examining how taxes paid change with the tax base. 7. Economic thinkers understand that the average tax rate captures the burden of a tax, but that behavior is more likely to be impacted by changes in the marginal tax rate.
u1557 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Integrate and evaluate multiple sources of information presented in diverse formats and media (e.g., visually, quantitatively, as well as in words) in order to address a question or solve a problem. 2. Process and effectively communicate and present information orally, in writing, and through development of websites, multimedia presentations, and other forms of technology.
u1558 (x=108) High School, Standard 3. Economics
=== page 129 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.120]
u1561 SOCIAL STUDIES High School, Standard 3. Economics
u1562 Prepared Graduates: 5. Evaluate how scarce resources are allocated in societies through the analysis of individual choice, market interaction, and public policy.
u1563 Grade Level Expectation: 3. Analyze how the business cycle affects the macroeconomy and evaluate the use of government policies to stabilize the economy.
u1565 (x=414) 2. What considerations should be taken into account when deciding to reduce the rate of inflation in an economy? 3. How might economics and politics intermingle when policymakers attempt to stabilize an economy? 4. How desirable are economic growth and improvements in productivity for a society?
u1566 (x=54) Students Can: a. Describe how economic indicators provide various perspectives of the
u1567 (x=68) health of the economy and vary with the business cycle. Including but not limited to: Gross Domestic Product (GDP), inflation, unemployment, and other non-traditional indicators. b. Describe how fiscal and monetary policy are used to manipulate the
u1568 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Economics: 1. Economic thinkers recognize the value and the limitations of GDP as a measure of economic well-being. 2. Economic thinkers understand how inflation and unemployment are calculated and used and recognize the potential imperfections of these measures. 3. Economic thinkers study when and how to apply fiscal and/or monetary policy to stabilize the macroeconomy. 4. Economic thinkers gather and analyze data to explore trends and predictions of the macroeconomy. 5. Economic thinkers study the relationship between fiscal and monetary policies and the impact on the economy. 6. Economic thinkers track productivity trends to better understand the underlying path of economic growth.
u1569 (x=68) economy including their potential lasting consequences. c. Explore how all policies have costs and benefits that impact participants of
u1570 (x=68) an economic system in different ways.
u1572 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Make predictions about the future course of the economy by interpreting economic data (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Design economic interventions to address economic challenges (Adaptability and Flexibility). 3. Evaluate the health of an economy using multiple sources of current and reliable economic data (Digital Literacy, Data Literacy). 4. Identify potential bias in sources of economic data (Media Literacy, Data Literacy).
u1573 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Process or synthesize information through writing using note taking, graphic organizers, summaries, proper sequencing of events, and/or formulating thesis statements that examine why as well as how. 2. Develop questions and plan inquiries.
u1574 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. In what ways is the U.S. standard of living different from past generations?
u1575 (x=108) High School, Standard 3. Economics
u1578 (x=54) SS.HS.3.3
=== page 130 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.121]
u1579 SOCIAL STUDIES High School, Standard 3. Economics
u1580 Prepared Graduates: 5. Evaluate how scarce resources are allocated in societies through the analysis of individual choice, market interaction, and public policy.
u1581 Grade Level Expectation: 4. Analyze how globalization and international trade affect the allocation of goods, services, and resources.
u1583 (x=414) 5. How defensible are the criticisms of free trade?
u1584 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Economics: 1. Economic thinkers recognize the importance of the theory of comparative advantage in determining the pattern of trade between countries. 2. Economic thinkers use the tool of demand and supply to better understand movements in exchange rates. 3. Economic thinkers recognize that fiscal and monetary policies affect people through various channels to include the impact on financial markets, the impact on exchange rates and the cost of travel, and the effect of interest rates on the cost of borrowing money. 4. Economic thinkers study why tariffs, quotas, and other trade policies are enacted by examining the winners and losers from such protectionism. 5. Economic thinkers use an economic way of thinking to study factors that lead to increased economic interdependence, increased productivity, and an improved standard of living for individuals in a society.
u1585 (x=54) Students Can: a. Analyze the role of comparative advantage in international trade of goods
u1586 (x=68) and services. b. Describe worldwide import/export patterns. c. Explain how trade policies affect international trade and domestic markets.
u1587 (x=68) Including but not limited to: free trade, tariffs, quotas, subsidies, and current policies. d. Explore the effects of current globalization trends and policies. For
u1588 (x=68) example: Economic growth, labor markets, the rights of citizens, and the environment in different nations.
u1590 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Apply knowledge and skills to analyze trade policy and its global complexities (Global and Cultural Awareness). 2. Make predictions about the effects of different trade policies (Social Awareness, Global and Cultural Awareness).
u1591 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Create, interpret, analyze, and detect bias in maps, graphs, charts, and diagrams. 2. Process or synthesize information through writing using note taking, graphic organizers, summaries, proper sequencing of events, and/or formulating thesis statements that examine why as well as how. 3. Formulate appropriate research questions. 4. Conduct research by gathering, organizing, and evaluating the credibility and bias of information from a variety of online, print, and non-print sources.
u1592 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. Why do people trade? 2. How important is international trade to the economies of various countries around the world? 3. What are some costs and benefits of globalization and international trade for various parties? 4. What opportunities might attract entrepreneurs into the international trade arena?
u1593 (x=108) High School, Standard 3. Economics
u1596 (x=54) SS.HS.3.4
=== page 131 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.122]
u1597 SOCIAL STUDIES High School, Standard 4. Civics
u1598 Prepared Graduates: 6. Express an understanding of how civic participation affects policy by applying the rights and responsibilities of a citizen.
u1599 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Research and formulate positions on government policies and on local, state, tribal, and national issues to be able to participate and engage in a civil society.
u1601 Students Can: a. Research and discuss current issues to participate in civil discourse. b. Describe and evaluate the effectiveness and acceptability of a variety of methods of civic participation that individuals and groups may use to shape policy at various
u1602 levels of government. c. Explain the roles and influence of individuals, groups, and the press, as checks on governmental practices. For example: Direct contact with elected officials,
u1603 participation in civic organizations, use of social media, and attendance at local governance meetings. d. Evaluate traditional and non-traditional types of media (both historic and modern), including social media for reliability, credibility, and how they may influence
u1604 government policy and public opinion. e. Engage as active community members with local, state, tribal, or federal levels of government on policy issues or for individual or group rights.
u1606 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Apply knowledge, skills, and habits gained from experiences to address issues, affect change, and/or solve problems (Civic Engagement). 2. Use interpersonal skills to establish and maintain healthy and supportive relationships to learn from and work with individuals and groups from diverse backgrounds in order to understand or impact a policy. (Interpersonal Communication). 3. Analyze how, why and for what purpose media messages are constructed, and the reliability of those messages, in order to support a stance on an issue (Media Literacy). 4. Collaborate with individuals and groups from diverse backgrounds and/or cultures to address national and global issues, and to develop workable solutions (Global and Cultural Awareness).
u1607 Inquiry Questions: 1. What are possible forms of civic participation in a democratic republic? 2. How can people act individually and collectively to hold elected officials accountable? 3. What strategies can people use most effectively to influence public policy? For example: Running for public office, lobbying, civil disobedience, and peaceful protests. 4. How do people remain civil and engage in discourse when there is dissonance?
u1608 (x=108) High School, Standard 4. Civics
u1611 (x=54) SS.HS.4.1
=== page 132 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.123]
u1612 5. Why should you participate in government? 6. What kinds of participation would be most effective on the policy issues you care about the most? 7. Why have or do some groups find it necessary to organize (i.e., unions, boycotts, peaceful protests, or strikes, as a means of civic participation)? 8. What barriers exist to civic participation? Who is most impacted by these barriers? What is the best way to challenge these barriers?
u1613 Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals research civic issues and act appropriately using a variety of sources from multiple perspectives and communicating views in a reasonable manner. 2. Civic-minded individuals communicate with stakeholders using logical reasoning with relevant, accurate data and evidence to influence policy. 3. Civic-minded individuals can verbally express their position on issues involving their community and/or nation in meaningful and thoughtful ways. For example: Community members speak at a school board, or city council meetings, or running for office. 4. Civic-minded individuals can listen to multiple perspectives as part of civil discourse. 5. Civic-minded individuals can work effectively individually, and in groups, to influence public policy and the actions of government.
u1614 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Decision-making involves researching an issue, listening to multiple perspectives, and weighing potential consequences of alternative actions. For example: Citizens research the issues before voting which may include using the Bluebook in Colorado. 2. Participation in a local, state, tribal, or national issue involves research, planning, and implementing appropriate civic engagement. 3. Social media can be a tool for researching civic issues, advocating for ideas, and expressing views to elected officials. 4. Conduct research by gathering, organizing, and evaluating the credibility and bias of information from a variety of online, print, and non-print sources. 5. Seek information from varied sources and perspectives to develop informed opinions and creative solutions. 6. Demonstrate the ability to locate, evaluate, and apply reliable evidence. 7. Demonstrate the ability to responsibly use a variety of media sources as a tool for civic participation. For example: Social media, print media, broadcast media. 8. Critically analyze messages in the media to detect propaganda, censorship, and bias. 9. Demonstrate responsible behaviors when using technology and discuss consequences of inappropriate use.
u1615 (x=108) High School, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 133 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.124]
u1618 SOCIAL STUDIES High School, Standard 4. Civics
u1619 Prepared Graduates: 7. Analyze the origins, structures, and functions of governments to evaluate the impact on citizens and the global society.
u1620 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Evaluate the purposes, roles, and limitations of the structures and functions of government.
u1622 Students Can: a. Describe the origins, purposes, and limitations of government, and include the contribution of key philosophers and American historical figures of diverse
u1623 backgrounds. b. Identify the structure, function, and roles of current members of local, state, and national governments. Including but not limited to: understanding the three
u1624 branches of government at each level of government. c. Analyze the processes for amending the Constitutions of Colorado and the United States and the significant changes that have occurred to those documents
u1625 including both the Colorado and the United States’ Bills of Rights. d. Explain the principles of a democracy and analyze how competing democratic values are balanced. For example: Freedom and security, individual rights and
u1626 common good, general welfare, and rights and responsibilities. e. Describe the role and development of the founding documents of Colorado and the United States from their inception to modern day. Including but not limited to:
u1627 the Great Law of Peace, the Declaration of Independence, the Constitutions of the United States and Colorado, the Federalist Papers, and the Bill of Rights. f. Evaluate the role of the judicial system in protecting life, liberty, and property for all persons in the United States. g. Understand the structure of the American judicial system, the process of judicial appointments and key court decisions, in both Colorado and the United States, that
u1628 affect the system of checks and balances and interactions of the local, state, tribal, and federal systems. Including but not limited to: significant Colorado court decisions such as Francisco Maestas et al. v. George H. Shone (1914), U.S. Term Limits, Inc. v. Thornton (1995), Romer v. Evans (1996), Colorado Union of Taxpayers Found. v. City of Aspen (2018); and landmark U.S. Supreme Court Cases such as Korematsu v. United States (1944), Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District (1969). h. Analyze how current global issues impact American policy. i. Compare and contrast how other systems of government function. For example: Authoritarian regimes, parliamentary, and other systems. j. Describe the relationship of tribal governments with state and federal governments. Including but not limited to: The Ute Mountain Ute and Southern Ute tribal
u1629 governments and the State of Colorado.
u1631 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Apply knowledge of governmental origins and structures to solve problems by gathering information and weighing possible solutions, including making choices rooted in understanding patterns, cause-and-effect relationships, and the impacts that a decision can have on the individual and others (Critical Thinking and Analysis).
u1632 (x=108) High School, Standard 4. Civics
u1635 (x=54) SS.HS.4.2
=== page 134 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.125]
u1636 2. Interpret information and draw conclusions about the origins of the structures of America’s governmental institutions (Civic Engagement). 3. Apply knowledge of government to develop workable solutions that address complex local, state, tribal, national, and global problems using interdisciplinary perspectives (Civic Engagement).
u1637 Inquiry Questions: 1. What are the most important democratic ideals and practices? 2. What are the natural rights and principles that Dr. Martin Luther King used to inform his leadership of The Civil Rights Movement? 3. How do various levels of government interact? 4. What would society look like if several landmark court cases had been decided differently? 5. How can U.S. and Colorado laws and policies best protect individual rights, and the rights of diverse or historically underrepresented groups? For example: African Americans, Latinos, Indigenous peoples, Asian Americans, Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, LGBTQ, and religious minorities? 6. How has American federalism evolved and changed over time? 7. How has the concept of American democracy developed throughout history and how could it continue to develop in relationship to current events? 8. How have domestic and foreign policies impacted American Democracy? 9. Why should people in the U.S. be informed of issues related to foreign governments? 10. Who are the elected officials who impact your life and how? 11. What are the rights and responsibilities of people in the United States? 12. How do the structures of the United States, state, and local governments impact democratic decision making? 13. What is the impact of lifetime judicial appointments? 14. What is the role of the Electoral College in electing the U.S. President? 15. How does the Electoral College impact different demographic groups and geographic areas? 16. How did the Three-Fifths Clause impact the development of American democracy? 17. How is education policy made in the United States, Colorado, and in your local community? 18. Why has the U.S. government’s response to genocide and other acts of mass violence varied so widely? 19. What foreign policy tools does the U.S. government have to respond to mass spread violence and genocides around the world? What factors influence how the U.S. government responds? 20. What is the role of failed states and authoritarian regimes in genocide and other acts of mass violence?
u1638 Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals know the facts and subject matter of the United States Citizenship test, the test that all foreign nationals must pass before becoming a U.S. citizen. 2. Civic-minded individuals understand the concept of “rule of law” and its role in policies and practices of the government. 3. Civic-minded individuals know the political theories that contributed to the foundation and development of the structures of government and their meaning today. 4. Civic-minded individuals understand how the U.S. system of government functions at the local, state, tribal, and federal level in respect to separation of powers and checks and balances and their impact on policy. 5. Civic-minded individuals understand the effectiveness of government institutions and the limits on government in addressing social and political problems.
u1639 (x=108) High School, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 135 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.126]
u1642 6. Civic-minded individuals gather and analyze data from multiple sources to look for patterns and create hypotheses regarding national and foreign policy. 7. Civic-minded individuals understand the importance of the founding documents of the United States. Including but not limited to: the Constitution of the United States, the Bill of Rights, the Declaration of Independence, the Emancipation Proclamation, and the Federalist Papers.
u1643 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Ask meaningful questions to analyze and evaluate information and ideas. 2. Determine central ideas in a text to provide an accurate summary and connect the relationship between key details and ideas. 3. Seek information from varied sources and perspectives to develop informed opinions and creative solutions. 4. Use media literacy skills to locate multiple reliable sources of information regarding the foundations, structures, and functions of government. 5. Write content-specific arguments that state a claim, provide evidence from texts and sources to support the claim, and organize the evidence in well-reasoned, meaningful ways. 6. Synthesize information from multiple sources to demonstrate understanding of a topic. 7. Delineate a speaker’s argument, identify specific claims, and distinguish if claims are supported by reasons and evidence.
u1644 (x=108) High School, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 136 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.127]
u1647 SOCIAL STUDIES High School, Standard 4. Civics
u1648 Prepared Graduates: 6. Express an understanding of how civic participation affects policy by applying the rights and responsibilities of a citizen.
u1649 Grade Level Expectation: 3. Analyze the impact of civic participation on political institutions and public policy.
u1651 Students Can: a. Describe how members of a civil society can impact public policy on local, state, national, or international issues by exercising their civic rights and responsibilities.
u1652 For example: Participation in primaries and general elections, contact with elected officials, petitions, protesting, attending public forums, or through initiatives and referenda. b. Evaluate opportunities for people to participate in and influence government through interest groups and social movements. For example: The tactics and strategies
u1653 of nonviolent resistance championed by Dr. Martin Luther King in response to the Jim Crow laws of that era, or the Indigenous land rights movement. c. Analyze the impact of state and federal policies on campaigns and elections. For example: PACs, campaign finance, gerrymandering/redistricting, state and federal
u1654 voting laws and regulations, Colorado’s voting laws, and the Federal Election Commission. d. Analyze how individual rights have been affected over time by court decisions, legislative debates at various levels of government, or by the advocacy of individuals
u1655 and groups. e. Examine how people in other systems of government exercise their civic rights and responsibilities. f. Examine the advantages and disadvantages of a two-party system or a multiparty system within a democratic government.
u1657 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Analyze the reliability of information, claims, and sources presented in the various forms of media and from a variety of perspectives (Media Literacy). 2. Apply knowledge and skills gained from experiences to address issues and affect change (Civic Engagement). 3. Access and evaluate information through digital platforms and networks (Digital Literacy).
u1658 Inquiry Questions: 1. What are the different ways people can impact public policy at various levels as individuals or through groups? 2. What are the civic duties and responsibilities of citizens and non-citizens in the United States? Including but not limited to: jury duty, voting, and registration for selective service. 3. How have voting rights evolved over time? 4. What current issues surround voting rights at the local, state, and national level? 5. What are interest groups and how do they influence policy? 6. How have elections changed over time?
u1659 (x=108) High School, Standard 4. Civics
u1662 (x=54) SS.HS.4.3
=== page 137 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.128]
u1663 7. How have political parties responded to societal and policy changes over time? 8. How has the participation of different demographic groups changed over time in the U.S. and how has this influenced American politics and the system of government? 9. How do primaries and caucuses impact political parties in the United States? 10. How does the winner-take-all system help to maintain a two-party system? 11. What role does gerrymandering play in the political process? 12. How can people responsibly engage with local elected officials about issues that impact their communities? 13. What role have court decisions played in determining the political process in the United States? For example: Voting rights, campaign finance, gerrymandering, etc. 14. How have the courts interpreted and modified civil rights and civil liberties over time?
u1664 Nature and Skills of Civics: 1. Civic-minded individuals use appropriate deliberative processes in multiple settings, such as caucuses, civic organizations, or advocating for change at the local, state, tribal, national, or international levels. 2. Civic-minded individuals analyze the impact and the appropriate roles of personal interests and perspectives on the application of civic virtues, democratic principles, constitutional rights, and human rights. 3. Civic-minded individuals evaluate citizens’ and institutions’ effectiveness in addressing social and political problems at the local, state, tribal, national, and/or international levels. 4. Civic-minded individuals evaluate social and political systems, in different contexts, times, and places, that promote civic virtues and enact democratic principles. 5. Civic-minded individuals analyze how people can use civic organizations, and social networks, including media to challenge local, state, tribal, national, and international laws that address a variety of public issues. 6. Civic-minded individuals analyze historical, contemporary, and emerging means of changing societies, promoting the common good, and protecting rights. 7. Civic-minded individuals evaluate multiple procedures for making and influencing governmental decisions at the local, state, tribal, national, and international levels in terms of the civic purposes achieved. 8. Civic-minded individuals can work effectively, both individually and in groups, to influence public policy and the actions of government.
u1665 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Identify the strategies that are used by political and civic entities to impact public opinion. For example: Interest groups, lobbying, political party platforms, social media networks, etc. 2. Identify how political issues are covered by the media, and how the media can influence public policy. 3. Identify ways in which various types of media can be evaluated for authenticity, validity, and reliability. 4. Evaluate the use of social media and crowdsourcing in political movements and campaigns. 5. Analyze content-specific texts to distinguish the factual evidence offered, reasoned judgments made, conclusions drawn, and speculative ideas offered in the text. 6. Synthesize information from multiple reliable sources to demonstrate understanding of a topic. 7. Present arguments or information in a logical sequence with a clear claim, supportive evidence, and effective presence that builds credibility.
u1666 (x=108) High School, Standard 4. Civics
=== page 138 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.129]
u1669 SOCIAL STUDIES High School, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u1670 Prepared Graduates: 8. Apply economic reasoning skills to make informed personal financial decisions.
u1671 Grade Level Expectation: 1. Apply reliable information to make systematic personal financial decisions based on individual and community values and goals.
u1673 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Personal Financial Literacy: 1. Financially capable individuals consider the value of professional development, income earning potential, value of workplace benefits, and labor market trends as part of a lifetime comprehensive financial plan. 2. Financially capable individuals demonstrate effective financial decision- making by comparing costs and benefits of alternatives. 3. Financially capable individuals demonstrate self-awareness and areas for ongoing financial education, growth, and development.
u1674 (x=54) Students Can: a. Recognize the alternatives, consequences, and responsibilities associated
u1675 (x=68) with personal financial decisions. b. Use reliable information resources when making financial decisions. c. Formulate strategies to protect personal and financial information. d. Develop a system for keeping and using financial records. e. Compare financial institutions and products.
u1676 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Gather relevant information from multiple print and digital sources, assess the credibility and accuracy of the sources. 2. Analyze how incentives influence choices that may result in policies with a range of costs and benefits for different groups.
u1678 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Make predictions and design data/information collection and analysis strategies (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Set personal goals and take responsibility for those goals through reflection upon prior outcomes (Self-Awareness).
u1679 Inquiry Questions: 1. How does a consumer determine the accuracy and relevance of consumer information? 2. How can a consumer locate and identify reliable sources of financial information? 3. What are some steps that can be taken to protect personal and financial information? 4. What are some things that should be considered when entering into a contract for financial services? 5. What are different methods of financial record keeping? 6. How can an individual create a financial plan aligned with their personal values and goals?
u1680 (x=108) High School, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u1683 (x=54) SS.HS.5.1
=== page 139 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.130]
u1684 SOCIAL STUDIES High School, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u1685 Prepared Graduates: 8. Apply economic reasoning skills to make informed personal financial decisions.
u1686 Grade Level Expectation: 2. Analyze sources of income and the relationship between career preparation, continuing education, and its impact on lifetime earning potential.
u1688 Students Can: a. Compare different sources of personal income and compensation. Including but not limited to: earned income, profit income, interest income, dividend income,
u1689 rental income, capital gains, and royalties. b. Analyze the impact of economic conditions and cost of living factors on income and purchasing power. c. Predict the potential impact of education and skill development choices on career earnings, including starting salary by field and level of degree or credential. d. Investigate the total cost, affordability, and payment options associated with postsecondary options, degrees, and credentials, including personal savings,
u1690 scholarships, grants, employer tuition programs, work study, and public and private loans. e. Review the purpose and the process of accessing state and federal financial aid.  Including but not limited to: the Colorado Application for State Financial Aid
u1691 (CASFA), the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) application for financial aid. f. Analyze student loan repayment options, terms, requirements, and state and federal repayment programs and their impact on a student’s financial future. g. Analyze the monetary and non-monetary value of employee benefits in addition to pay. For example: Benefits, flexible work options, and retirement plans. h. Simulate a sustainable household budget based on future personal and career goals.
u1693 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Make predictions and design data/information collection and analysis strategies (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Set personal goals and take responsibility for those goals through reflection upon prior outcomes (Self-Management). 3. Demonstrate knowledge, understanding, and personal awareness of how their dreams and interests translate into career fulfillment and career pathways available in local, regional, national, and global arenas (Self-Awareness).
u1694 Inquiry Questions: 1. How can income earning potential be maximized with intentional choices and planning? 2. What is the role of education and earning capability in building financial security? 3. What potential barriers might impede an individual’s work routine, hinder the ability to get a job, or prevent career advancement, and how can an individual overcome the barriers? 4. What resources are available to individuals seeking help with career, employment, and training?
u1695 (x=108) High School, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u1698 (x=54) SS.HS.5.2
=== page 140 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.131]
u1699 5. How might life circumstances impact a household budget? 6. Should student loans be listed under Financial Aid on a Student Aid Report?
u1700 Nature and Skills of Personal Financial Literacy: 1. Financially capable individuals consider the value of professional development, income earning potential, value of workplace benefits, and labor market trends as part of a lifetime comprehensive financial plan. 2. Financially capable individuals plan for income tax liability. 3. Financially capable individuals consider opportunity costs when making decisions about professional development and career changes. 4. Financially capable individuals analyze economic cycles and make predictions regarding economic trends. 5. Financially capable individuals calculate the sustainable household income given specific market conditions and lifestyle circumstances which provides consumers with income earning goals when deciding employment, career path, and professional development.
u1701 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Analyze how incentives influence choices that may result in policies with a range of costs and benefits for different groups. 2. Describe the consequences of competition in specific markets. 3. Explain how current globalization trends and policies affect economic growth, labor markets, rights of citizens, the environment, and resource and income distribution in different nations.
u1702 (x=108) High School, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
=== page 141 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.132]
u1705 SOCIAL STUDIES High School, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u1706 Prepared Graduates: 8. Apply economic reasoning skills to make informed personal financial decisions.
u1707 Grade Level Expectation: 3. Apply consumer skills to budgeting, spending, saving, and borrowing decisions.
u1709 (x=414) Inquiry Questions: 1. How might changes in the economic cycle and market conditions affect household saving and spending habits? 2. How might changes in lifestyle, income, or life circumstances affect a household financial plan? 3. How can implementing an intentional savings plan provide stability and secure an individual’s financial future? 4. What are some strategies individuals can implement to increase their savings? 5. How can individuals take steps to begin building credit? 6. How can individuals increase their credit score without taking on debt? 7. What are the advantages of secured vs. unsecured credit accounts? 8. When might it make sense to take on debt? When does it not make sense? 9. How much will today’s purchase cost tomorrow? 10. What resources are available to individuals seeking help with financial hardships? 11. How does taking on debt impact finances? 12. What types of decisions can be made in order to avoid debt? 13. What strategies can consumers use to pay down debt as quickly as possible? 14. What impacts do different types of interest rates have on consumers? For example: Fixed rates, variable rates, and adjustable-rate mortgages. 15. Which types of loans typically charge higher interest rates? 16. What types of consumers are most likely to be targeted by predatory lenders?
u1710 (x=54) Students Can: a. Analyze how inflation and cost of living impact consumer purchasing and
u1711 (x=68) saving power. b. Summarize factors to consider when selecting borrowing options, including
u1712 (x=68) costs, relevance, payoffs, and tradeoffs. For example: Comparing student, auto, home, and payday loans. c. Explain how an individual’s credit history can affect borrowing power. d. Design a household budget (using gross and net income) that addresses
u1713 (x=68) financial obligations and integrates saving for future goals and retirement based on your values and goals. e. Describe how to use and manage different types of accounts and payment
u1714 (x=68) methods. f. Compare the advantages and disadvantages of various types of credit. g. Summarize the advantages and disadvantages of leasing versus purchasing
u1715 (x=68) automobiles, homes, and other large purchases.
u1717 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Make predictions and design data/information collection and analysis strategies (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Take responsibility for spending decisions and borrowing decisions (Self- Advocacy and Initiative). 3. Set personal goals and take responsibility for those goals through reflection upon prior outcomes (Self-Management).
u1718 (x=108) High School, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u1721 (x=54) SS.HS.5.3
=== page 142 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.133]
u1722 (x=54) Nature and Skills of Personal Financial Literacy: 1. Financially capable individuals demonstrate effective decision-making based on their values and preferences and by comparing costs and benefits of alternatives. 2. Financially capable individuals plan and monitor spending and saving to fulfill financial obligations and achieve goals as part of a comprehensive financial plan. 3. Financially capable individuals know their rights and obligations when using credit. 4. Financially capable individuals understand that there is an economic role for government in a market economy whenever the benefits of a government policy outweigh its costs.
u1723 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Gather relevant information from multiple print and digital sources and assess the credibility and accuracy of the sources. 2. Read and comprehend complex informational texts.  For example: Financial aid and credit card offers. 3. Analyze how consumer choices have different costs and benefits. 4. Analyze and compare types of interest, including rates, terms, and long- term impacts. 5. Read and comprehend a consumer credit report.
u1724 (x=108) High School, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
=== page 143 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.134]
u1727 SOCIAL STUDIES High School, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u1728 Prepared Graduates: 8. Apply economic reasoning skills to make informed personal financial decisions.
u1729 Grade Level Expectation: 4. Explore a diversified investment strategy that is compatible with personal financial goals.
u1731 (x=414) Nature and Skills of Personal Financial Literacy: 1. Financially capable individuals consider the value that investing plays as part of a lifetime comprehensive financial plan. 2. Financially capable individuals carefully consider the amount of financial risk that they can tolerate based on life stage, and they plan for changes in the economic cycles. 3. Financially capable individuals create plans based on sound financial planning principles to maximize their standard of living over time. 4. Financially capable individuals analyze market conditions and make predictions regarding economic trends. 5. Financially capable individuals know how to perform time value of money calculations allowing investigation of rate of return, future value of investments, and present value of long-term financial goals. 6. Financially capable individuals understand the relationship between variables in a function which allows people to use functions to model relationships in the real world such as the impact of compound interest. 7. Financially capable individuals can describe how to buy and sell various assets and investments. For example: Stocks, real estate, and businesses.
u1732 (x=54) Students Can: a. Select financial investments that align with financial goals, risk tolerance,
u1733 (x=68) and personal and retirement options for different life stages. b. Analyze how financial markets react to changes in market conditions,
u1734 (x=68) monetary policy, fiscal policy, and information. For example: The business cycle.
u1736 (x=54) Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Make predictions and design data/information collection and analysis strategies (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Set personal goals and take responsibility for those goals through reflection upon prior outcomes (Self-Management).
u1737 (x=54) Inquiry Questions: 1. How does a consumer choose between investment options? 2. How might changes in the economic cycle and market conditions affect future earnings on an individual’s investments? 3. How can a consumer obtain accurate information about different assets and investments? 4. How can a consumer determine the value of an asset or investment? 5. How does a consumer research and validate the accuracy of financial information? 6. How does investing fit into an individual’s comprehensive financial plan? 7. How do different types and values of investments impact taxes?
u1738 (x=414) Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Gather relevant information from multiple print and digital sources, assess the credibility and accuracy of the sources. 2. Read and comprehend complex informational texts.  For example: A stock chart or an account disclaimer. 3. Analyze how risk and reward incentives influence choices that may result in costs and benefits for different groups.
u1739 (x=108) High School, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u1742 (x=54) SS.HS.5.4
=== page 144 === [running header: Evidence Outcomes | Academic Context and Connections | Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.135]
u1743 SOCIAL STUDIES High School, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u1744 Prepared Graduates: 8. Apply economic reasoning skills to make informed personal financial decisions.
u1745 Grade Level Expectation: 5. Choose risk management strategies for protection from the financial risk of lost income, lost or damaged property, health issues, or identity fraud.
u1747 Students Can: a. Evaluate strategies for consumers to avoid financial risk, reduce risk, accept risk, or transfer risk to others through insurance. b. Identify the cost and benefits of purchasing insurance. For example: Insured profile, number and size of claims, frequency, and costs of natural disasters. c. Explain the types and purpose of insurance products. For example: Automotive, identity theft, health, disability, long-term care, life insurance, renters/homeowners’
u1748 insurance, and professional liability. d. Outline steps to monitor and safeguard personal financial data to minimize, avoid and/or resolve identity theft or fraud issues. e. Analyze consumer and financial information for relevance, credibility, and accuracy. f. Identify consumer responsibilities, rights, and consumer protection laws that regulate contracts and financial transactions.
u1750 Colorado Essential Skills: 1. Interpret information and draw conclusions based on the best analysis (Critical Thinking and Analysis). 2. Develop, plan, and organize self-behavior (Self-Management).
u1751 Inquiry Questions: 1. How are individuals, groups of consumers, and markets impacted by unexpected financial obligations due to property loss or damage, loss of income, health care issues, and fraud? 2. What should a consumer consider when choosing insurance for particular situations? 3. How will insurance needs change throughout a lifetime? 4. How does probability relate to obtaining insurance and the cost of insurance? 5. How does insurance fit into an individual’s comprehensive financial plan? 6. What consumer scams are common? 7. How can consumers be aware of and protect themselves from scams? 8. What are the different types of insurance and how do they work? 9. What is the difference between an insurance premium and deductible? 10. How can an individual determine that they are adequately insured?
u1752 (x=108) High School, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
u1755 (x=54) SS.HS.5.5
=== page 145 === [running header: Colorado Academic Standards (adopted 2022) | SS.136]
u1756 11. How can an individual evaluate how much they are willing to pay for different levels of insurance coverage based on their risk assessment?
u1757 Nature and Skills of Personal Financial Literacy: 1. Financially capable individuals mitigate the financial risks associated with everyday life through planning for the unexpected, saving for emergencies, acquiring insurance, and securing personal information. 2. Financially capable individuals consider insurance as a part of a lifetime comprehensive financial plan. 3. Financially capable individuals demonstrate effective financial decision-making by comparing the additional costs of alternatives with the additional benefits. 4. Financially capable individuals understand that probability allows informed decision-making, such as whether the cost of insurance is less than the expected cost of illness, when the deductible on car insurance is optimal, or whether an extended warranty justifies the cost.
u1758 Disciplinary, Information, and Media Literacy: 1. Read and comprehend complex informational texts. For example: Insurance policies. 2. Analyze how incentives influence choices that may result in policies with a range of costs and benefits for different groups. 3. Compare and contrast financial information when making a decision. 4. Research current identity theft and financial scams.
u1759 (x=108) High School, Standard 5. Personal Financial Literacy
