=== page 1 === [running header: Economics | Enduring Understanding | S i n c e T i m e I m m e m o r i a l C o n n e c t i o n s | Middle School Curriculum | Social Studies Learning Standards, Grades 6–8 | page 61]
u2 [T1 R1 C2] E1: Understands that people have to make choices between wants and needs
u3 [T1 R2 C2] and evaluates the outcomes of those choices.
u5  (World) As ancient and medieval societies grew, the needs and wants of their citizens changed.
u6 These changes impacted those societies in multiple ways, influencing the futures of those societies.
u7  (WA) By considering alternative choices for economic decisions made by groups and
u8 individuals, one can evaluate whether the benefits outweigh the costs of those decisions.
u9  (US) People’s actions are influenced by the desire for economic growth. Those actions have
u10 consequences that can conflict with personal values or with the needs of other cultures present in the society whose voices are not heard in the decision-making process.
u11 [T2 R2 C1] C o m p o n e n t s (World) By the end of 6th grade, students will: E1.6-8.1 Analyze the costs and benefits of economic choices made by groups and individuals in the past or present. (WA) By the end of 7th grade, students will: E1.6-8.2 Evaluate alternative approaches or solutions to current economic issues of Washington state in terms of costs and benefits for different groups. (US) By the end of 8th grade, students will: E1.6-8.3 Analyze examples of how groups and individuals have considered profit and personal values in making economic choices in the past or present.
u12 [T2 R2 C2] Sample Questions  (World) In what ways did the needs and wants of a society influence changes that occurred within that society?  (WA) What are the impacts of dif- fering solutions to a current eco- nomic issue in Washington state? Who benefits and who loses with various solutions? Who had a voice in the decisions?  (US) How did the desire for eco- nomic growth influence people and groups in the United States? Was there equal access to economic growth for all groups?
u15 E1.6-8.1 and E1.6-8.3: Washington State History: Units 1 (Territory and Treaty Making), 1 (The Walla Walla
u16 Treaty Council of 1855), 2, and 3; and U.S. History: Units 1, 2, 3, and 4 E1.6-8.2: Washington State History: Units 2 and 3
=== page 2 === [running header: Economics | Enduring Understanding | S i n c e T i m e I m m e m o r i a l C o n n e c t i o n s | Middle School Curriculum | Social Studies Learning Standards, Grades 6–8 | page 62]
u19 [T1 R1 C2] E2: Understands how economic systems function.
u21  (World) Extensive trade relationships emerged between nations in ancient times to acquire
u22 scarce resources and maximize the economic standing of participating civilizations.
u23  (WA) Washington’s location and geographic regions affect the production of goods and the
u24 state’s role in the global economy.
u25  (US) The free market economy of United States is driven by the exchange of goods and services,
u26 which has many influences. Most notable is the agreement by the producer and consumer on the value of the items to be exchanged.
u27 [T2 R1 C1] C o m p o n e n t s (World) By the end of 6th grade, students will: E2.6-8.1 Describe the production, distribution, and con- sumption of goods, services, and resources in societies from the past or in the present. E2.6-8.2 Explain how scarce resources have affected in- ternational trade in the past or present. (WA) By the end of 7th grade, students will: E2.6-8.3 Analyze the production, distribution, and con- sumption of goods, services, and resources in societies from the past or in the present. E2.6-8.4 Analyze how the forces of supply and demand have affected international trade in Washington state in the past or present. (US) By the end of 8th grade, students will: E2.6-8.5 Analyze how the forces of supply and demand have affected the production, distribution, and con- sumption of goods, services, and resources in the Unit- ed States in the past or present. E2.6-8.6 Analyze how the forces of supply and demand have affected international trade in the United States in the past or present.
u28 [T2 R1 C2] Sample Questions  (World) Why did trade develop and how did the method of trade e- volve over time? What is the rela- tionship between labor and trade? Who provides the labor?  (WA) How does Washington’s lo- cation and physical geography im- pact its economy?  (US) How does supply and demand affect the value of goods and serv- ices? Who has control of supply and demand?
u31 E2.6-8.1-6: Washington State History: Units 1 (Territory and Treaty Making), 1 (The Walla Walla Treaty
u32 Council of 1855), 2, and 3; and U.S. History: Units 2, 3, and 4
=== page 3 === [running header: Economics | Enduring Understanding | S i n c e T i m e I m m e m o r i a l C o n n e c t i o n s | Middle School Curriculum | Social Studies Learning Standards, Grades 6–8 | page 63]
u35 [T1 R1 C2] E3: Understands the government’s role in the economy.
u37  (World) Governments have always been involved in the economic matters of their societies, but
u38 vary in the degree of regulation and control from ancient to modern times.
u39  (WA) The way that money is managed by the state, through taxation and spending, impacts the
u40 economy of the state.
u41  (WA/US) Tribes, as sovereign nations, have independent economies with different government
u42 regulations separate from the United States and Washington state.
u43  (US) The federal government has the power to impose taxes and tariffs, and regulate the
u44 printing of money.
u45 [T2 R1 C1] C o m p o n e n t s (World) By the end of 6th grade, students will: E3.6-8.1 Explain the role of government in the world’s economies through the creation of money, taxation, and spending in the past or present. (WA) By the end of 7th grade, students will: E3.6-8.2 Analyze the role of government in the economy of Washington state through taxation, spending, and policy setting in the past or present. (US) By the end of 8th grade, students will: E3.6-8.3 Analyze the influence of the U.S. government’s taxation, creation of currency, and tariffs in the past or present.
u46 [T2 R1 C2] Sample Questions  (World) How were governments of ancient and medieval times in- volved in the monetary systems of their societies?  (WA) How has the government impacted the state’s economy through its legislative process? How have choices in taxation policy affected different groups in Wash- ington: small and large businesses; upper, middle, and lower income people? Are there some groups who benefit while others are harmed?  (WA/US) How do treaties affect the economic interaction between fed- eral, state, and tribal governments?  (US) How does government mone- tary policy influence the economy? How does it influence people’s lives?
u49 E3.6-8.1-3: Washington State History: Unit 3
=== page 4 === [running header: Economics | Enduring Understanding | S i n c e T i m e I m m e m o r i a l C o n n e c t i o n s | Middle School Curriculum | Social Studies Learning Standards, Grades 6–8 | page 64]
u52 [T1 R1 C2] E4: Understands the economic issues and problems that all societies face.
u54  (World) Societies and individuals who control trade historically have had an economic and
u55 political advantage over those who do not. Unequal distribution of wealth within a society creates distinct socio-economic classes. The managing of resources and barriers to trade creates challenges for maintaining societal lifestyles.
u56  (WA) Natural resources and climate impact economic and population development differently
u57 in distinct regions of Washington state.
u58  (US) Groups and individuals who control elements of trade tend to have an economic and
u59 political advantage over those who do not. Unequal distribution of wealth within a society creates distinct socio-economic classes. The managing of resources creates challenges for maintaining their lifestyle, or facing the possibility of societal strife.
u60 [T2 R1 C1] C o m p o n e n t s (World) By the end of 6th grade, students will: E4.6-8.1 Explain the distribution of wealth and sustaina- bility of resources in the world. E4.6-8.2 Explain barriers to trade and how those barriers influence trade among nations. (WA) By the end of 7th grade, students will: E4.6-8.3 Analyze the distribution of wealth and sustaina- bility of resources in Washington state. E4.6-8.4 Explain the costs and benefits of trade policies to individuals, businesses, and society in Washington state. (US) By the end of 8th grade, students will: E4.6-8.5 Analyze the distribution of wealth and sustaina- bility of resources in the United States. E4.6-8.6 Explain the costs and benefits of trade policies to individuals, businesses, and society in the United States.
u61 [T2 R1 C2] Sample Questions  (World) What were the effects of resource management on society? How did the management of re- sources affect barriers to trade? How did barriers to trade affect management of resources?  (WA) How have the use and conser- vation of resources changed the development and economy of some regions in Washington state?  (US) What were the effects of re- source management on the devel- opment of the United States? What was the impact of slavery on U.S. resources and what are the en- during legacies?  How is a community’s standard of living connected to the manage- ment of resources?
u64 E4.6-8.1-6: Washington State History: Units 1 (Territory and Treaty Making), 1 (The Walla Walla Treaty
u65 Council of 1855), and 3; and U.S. History: Units 2, 3, and 4
