=== page 1 ===
u1 (x=247) WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition Kindergarten—Grade 12
u2 (x=102) KINDERGARTEN
u3 (x=103) Materials
u4 Promote equity for multilingual learners Teach language and content together
=== page 2 ===
u5 Suggested citation: WIDA. (2020). WIDA English language development standards framework, 2020 edition: Kindergarten– grade 12. Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System.
u6 © 2021 Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System WIDA is housed within the Wisconsin Center for Education Research at the University of Wisconsin-Madison
u7 Version 1.0
=== page 3 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 3]
u8 WIDA English Language
u9 Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition Kindergarten—Grade 12
u10 These materials are part of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework, 2020 Edition. The 2020 Edition offers several resources to support applications of the Framework, including materials that are geared specifically for grade-level clusters K, 1, 2-3, 4-5, 6-8, and 9-12.
u11 The complete 2020 Edition includes other useful resources for educators. Section 4, in particular, includes • Key Language Uses: A Closer Look • Collaborative Planning for Content and Language Integration: A Jump-Off Point for Curricular Conversations • A glossary of linguistic terms in the 2020 Edition
u12 Moreover, eight appendices offer valuable information for specific purposes and audiences • Appendix A: WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition—Meeting ESSA Title 1 Requirements • Appendix B: Correspondence Tables for Content and Language Standards • Appendix C: A Compilation of K-12 Key Language Use Distribution Tables and Language Expectations • Appendix D: A Compilation of K-12 Proficiency Level Descriptors, with Technical Notes • Appendix E: High-Level Comparison of WIDA Standards Editions From 2004 to 2020 • Appendix F: Theoretical Foundations of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework, 2020 Edition • Appendix G: Select References • Appendix H: Standards Development Process and Acknowledgments
u13 To download a complete copy of the WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition, visit the WIDA website at wida.wisc.edu/teach/standards/eld. Or, you can buy a print copy from the WIDA Store, at www.wceps.org/Store.
=== page 4 === [running header: 4 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u15 [T1 R4 C1] he WID
u16 [T1 R5 C1] Sta
u17 Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition
u18 WIDA has historically grounded its work in language development standards as a driver of equity for multilingual learners in curriculum, instruction, and assessment. This new edition reflects a continued commitment to these goals.
u19 Starting in 2004, all editions of the WIDA English Language Development (ELD) Standards have reflected the belief that multilingual learners are best served when they learn content and language together in linguistically and culturally sustaining ways. The 2020 Edition recommits to this belief by maintaining the five original WIDA ELD Standards Statements while adding new and expanded resources to address updates in policy, theory, and practice.
u20 WIDA ELD Standards Statements
u21 English Language Development Standard 1: English language learners communicate for Social and Instructional purposes within the school setting
u22 English Language Development Standard 2: English language learners communicate information, ideas, and concepts necessary for academic success in the content area of Language Arts
u23 English Language Development Standard 3: English language learners communicate information, ideas, and concepts necessary for academic success in the content area of Mathematics
u24 English Language Development Standard 4: English language learners communicate information, ideas, and concepts necessary for academic success in the content area of Science
u25 English Language Development Standard 5: English language learners communicate information, ideas, and concepts necessary for academic success in the content area of Social Studies
=== page 5 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 5]
u27 WIDA Mission, Vision, and Values
u28 WIDA draws its strength from its mission, vision, and values—the Can Do Philosophy, innovation, service, collaboration, and social justice. This belief system underscores the cultural, social, emotional, and experiential assets of multilingual learners, their families, and educators. It acts as a unifying force that gives the consortium its strength of conviction and action throughout the PreK-12 education community.
u29 Mission WIDA advances academic language development and academic achievement for children and youth who are culturally and linguistically diverse through high quality standards, assessments, research, and professional learning for educators.
u30 From English Language Learners to Multilingual Learners
u31 As part of its asset-based belief system, WIDA uses the term
u32 (x=247) “multilingual learners” to describe all students who come in contact with and/or interact in languages in addition to English on a regular basis. They include students who are commonly referred to as English language learners (ELLs), dual language learners (DLLs), newcomers, students with interrupted formal schooling (SIFE), long-term English learners (L-TELs), English learners with disabilities, gifted and talented English learners, heritage language learners, students with English as an additional language (EAL), and students who speak varieties of English or indigenous languages.
u33 (x=90) Multilingual learners refers to all children and youth who are, or have been, consistently exposed to multiple languages.
u34 Throughout the field of K-12 education, you will encounter various terms to describe multilingual learners. For example, ESSA (2015) uses the term “English learners” (ELs). For policy purposes, the five original WIDA ELD Standards Statements (2004) maintain the term “English language learners.” However, in an effort to encourage the field to use terminology that is asset-based and inclusive, WIDA began to use the term “multilingual learners.” You will see this term used throughout this document, starting with the Guiding Principles of Language Development on the next page.
=== page 6 === [running header: 6 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u36 WIDA Guiding Principles of Language Development (2019)
u37 The updated Guiding Principles of Language Development exemplify the overarching and ever-present WIDA Can Do Philosophy and emphasize the importance of language in learning. They highlight the four Big Ideas of the 2020 Edition.
u38 1. Multilingual learners’ languages and cultures are valuable resources to be leveraged for schooling and classroom life; leveraging these assets and challenging biases help develop multilingual learners’ independence and encourage their agency in learning.
u39 2. Multilingual learners’ development of multiple languages enhances their knowledge and cultural bases, their intellectual capacities, and their flexibility in language use.
u40 3. Multilingual learners’ language development and learning occur over time through meaningful engagement in activities that are valued in their homes, schools, and communities.
u41 4. Multilingual learners’ language, social-emotional, and cognitive development are inter-related processes that contribute to their success in school and beyond.
u42 5. Multilingual learners use and develop language when opportunities for learning take into account their individual experiences, characteristics, abilities, and levels of language proficiency.
u43 6. Multilingual learners use and develop language through activities which intentionally integrate multiple modalities, including oral, written, visual, and kinesthetic modes of communication.
u44 7. Multilingual learners use and develop language to interpret and access information, ideas, and concepts from a variety of sources, including real-life objects, models, representations, and multimodal texts.
u45 8. Multilingual learners draw on their metacognitive, metalinguistic, and metacultural awareness to develop effectiveness in language use.
u46 9. Multilingual learners use their full linguistic repertoire, including translanguaging practices, to enrich their language development and learning.
u47 10. Multilingual learners use and develop language to interpret and present different perspectives, build awareness of relationships, and affirm their identities.
u48 (x=367) BONJOUR
u49 (x=230) HOLA
u50 (x=173) Hello!
u51 (x=388) JAMBO
u52 (x=251) NILTZE
u53 (x=406) Hello!
u54 (x=229) Hello!
u55 (x=346) HALLO
u56 Hello!
u57 (x=271) Hello!
u58 (x=456) Hello!
=== page 7 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 7]
u60 (x=144) HOLA
u61 (x=209) BONJOUR
u62 (x=233) HELLO
u63 (x=116) NILTZE
u64 (x=131) HALLO
u65 (x=199) JAMBO
u66 Big Ideas of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework, 2020 Edition: Kindergarten–Grade 12
u67 This 2020 Edition of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework is anchored by four Big Ideas that are interwoven throughout the document. Like the Can Do Philosophy, they support the design of standards-based educational experiences that are student-centered, culturally and linguistically sustaining, and responsive to multilingual learners’ strengths and needs.
u68 Big Ideas in the 2020 Edition
u69 (x=191) EQUITY of Opportunity
u70 (x=344) INTEGRATION
u71 (x=352) of Content and
u72 (x=187) and Access
u73 (x=369) Language
u74 (x=344) FUNCTIONAL
u75 (x=153) COLLABORATION
u76 (x=353) APPROACH to Language Development
u77 (x=162) among Stakeholders
=== page 8 === [running header: 8 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u79 Equity of Opportunity and Access
u80 WIDA’s philosophy is rooted in equity and a commitment to supporting high-quality education for multilingual learners. This support for educational excellence is evident in WIDA’s vision, mission, and values—innovation, service, the Can Do Philosophy, collaboration, and social justice. As a WIDA value, social justice includes creating positive change, challenging discriminatory actions (i.e., in terms of language, culture, and race), and promoting equity to improve the education of multilingual children, youth, and families.
u81 Multilingual learners come from a wide range of cultural, linguistic, educational, and socioeconomic backgrounds and have many physical, social, emotional, experiential, and/or cognitive differences. All bring assets, potential, and resources to schools that educators must leverage to increase equity in standards-based systems. Increasing avenues of access, agency, and equity for all multilingual learners—including newcomers, students with interrupted formal schooling (SIFE), long-term English learners (L-TELs), students with disabilities, and gifted and talented English learners—requires educators to be knowledgeable, skillful, imaginative, and compassionate.
u82 The 2020 Edition of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework is here to guide educators to
u83 • Set high expectations for all students • Provide access for multilingual learners to rich, standards-based, grade-level content, including by scaffolding up (see the WIDA website for resources about scaffolding) • Enact linguistically and culturally sustainable pedagogies • Create opportunities for multilingual learners to • engage actively with each other in deep learning • access and use multiple languages, including through translanguaging
u84 When designing and delivering standards-based curriculum, instruction, and assessment, educators should consider multilingual learners’
u85 • Previous personal and educational experiences • Recency of arrival in the United States, if applicable • Diverse cognitive and behavioral strengths, needs, and abilities • Home and community • Languages and cultures
u86 Drawing on students’ linguistic and cultural resources is essential to helping them navigate life in a diverse world, in addition to supporting them in meeting demands of academic content areas as they advance through school.
u87 The 2020 Edition of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework upholds the goal of increasing equity for multilingual learners by providing common and visible language expectations in relation to grade-level academic content. These expectations also serve to increase coherence of policy and practice around the education of multilingual learners at federal, state, and local levels.
u88 Integration of Content and Language
u89 Earlier versions of the WIDA ELD Standards (2004, 2007, 2012) have historically represented the integration of content and language. The 2020 Edition makes the content–language connection more explicit and specific.
=== page 9 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 9]
u91 By content–language integration, we mean that multilingual learners develop content and language concurrently, with academic content as a context for language learning and language as a means for learning academic content.
u92 The 2020 Edition introduces several new ways of looking at the integration of content and language, for example, through Key Language Uses, Language Expectations, and Correspondence Tables for Content and Language Standards (Appendix B); all these (and more) are introduced later in this document.
u93 (x=372) In positioning the 2020 Edition to spotlight the variety of ways in which language is used in content area learning, WIDA is drawing educators’ attention to multimodality, the use of multiple means of communication. Multimodality is inherent to and essential for how students make meaning and engage in disciplinary practices. All students are able to both interpret and express ideas with greater flexibility when using
u94 (x=90) Multimodality, the use of multiple means of communication, is an essential way for all students to access and engage in the content areas. In addition to the use of spoken and written language, students also communicate through gestures, facial expressions, images, equations, maps, symbols, diagrams, charts, videos, graphs, computer-mediated content, and other means.
u95 multimodal resources, including multiple languages. Multimodality allows all students to use multiple means to engage, interpret, represent, act, and express their ideas in the classroom. For example, as students read, they also might refer to illustrations or diagrams, and as students write, they might also represent their ideas numerically or graphically.
u96 The integration of content and language for multilingual learners promotes
u97 • Understanding the connections between content and language • Making meaning within and across content areas (disciplines) • Interaction of students with each other in challenging content activities • Coordination of design and delivery of curriculum, instruction, and assessment
u98 Collaboration among Stakeholders
u99 (x=366) Collaboration among stakeholders (e.g., district and school leaders, content and language teachers, specialists, support personnel, students, families) is essential for providing multilingual learners high-quality educational experiences that are coordinated and comprehensive.
u100 (x=72) Districts and schools are complex educational systems with collaboration extending across stakeholders from classrooms, to schools, districts, and the families and communities of students. Stakeholders have different areas of expertise and are often responsible for different aspects of educational planning and delivery; however, collectively they are responsible for the success of multilingual learners.
u101 It is crucial for the academic success of multilingual learners that both language and content teachers and administrators see themselves as responsible for fostering the language development of multilingual learners, and for systems to move away from the idea that language specialists alone should assume sole responsibility for students’ language development.
=== page 10 === [running header: 10 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u103 Although different classrooms may have different instructional foci, all classrooms with multilingual learners must incorporate content and language development. Content teachers bring expertise in their discipline, while language teachers bring expertise in language development. Each teacher can contribute to deliver coordinated educational experiences for multilingual learners according to their own qualifications and areas of expertise. With sustained collaboration, language teachers expand their understanding of different content areas, and content teachers develop insights into and respond to the language development needs of multilingual learners.
u104 Content and language teachers can work together to
u105 • Plan and deliver grade-level standards-based instruction • Plan for systematic, explicit, and sustained language development alongside the academic demands of the content areas • Support one another • Share unique fields of expertise
u106 In this way, multilingual learners and their families benefit from a coherent and shared understanding of expectations and common goals for learning.
u107 (x=72) Functional Approach to Language Development
u108 (x=352) Language: a dynamic system used by particular communities for communicating with others. The choices we make with language enable us to accomplish many purposes (e.g., to represent experiences, share ideas, to enact roles and relationships, and act upon the world).
u109 (x=72) What does WIDA mean by a functional approach to language development? One metaphor for language is a toolbox, containing different tools that are used to communicate, to develop relationships, and to act upon the world. Like any good toolbox, the language toolbox contains various tools that function for different needs. Particular linguistic tools achieve certain purposes. For example, we make choices with language to reflect the topic at hand, the social roles and identities of those involved (am I talking to a college admissions interviewer or to my best friend?), and the needs of our listeners and readers. We make choices with language to organize our ideas in particular ways, to convey the relationships among these ideas, and about what types of words are most effective for our message. The explicit teaching of how language works can help multilingual learners expand what they can do with language, thereby growing their language toolbox. The result is that students become increasingly aware and strategic in their use of language to negotiate meaning and achieve their purposes in various contexts.
u110 (x=352) Language development: an interactive social process that occurs over time to expand what we can do with language.
u111 (x=352) Sociocultural context: the association of language with the culture and community in which it is used. In schools, it refers to the interaction among students and the classroom environment, along with the influences that shape the environment (e.g., purpose, topic, situation, participant’s identities and social roles, audience).
u112 To read more about all these Big
u113 Ideas, see the WIDA website.
=== page 11 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 11]
u115 Understanding the WIDA ELD Standards Framework
u116 Underpinned by the four Big Ideas, the WIDA ELD Standards Framework is a language development standards framework for K-12 academic settings.
u117 Sometimes people describe a standards framework as being like a map. In the same way that a map points out common, visible landmarks, a standards framework points out common, visible expectations for all students and helps to bring coherence across educational systems. The WIDA ELD Standards Framework is like a map in that it offers language expectations as destination points, as well as road signs to set goals for curriculum, instruction, and assessment for multilingual learners.
u118 The WIDA ELD Standards Framework consists of four components, each explored in the following pages. These four components are like building blocks of language development, and range from broad to narrow in scope. They work together to make a comprehensive picture of language development:
u119 • Five WIDA ELD Standards Statements provide the broadest conceptual framing and illustrate the integration of content and language. The standards statements show language use in the service of learning—in other words, language for thinking and doing. They address the language of schooling. • Key Language Uses describe prominent ways that language is used in school, across all disciplines. When educators make choices about how to integrate content and language, the Key Language Uses can help provide focus and coherence. • Language Expectations set goals for content-driven language learning. They add specificity to the ELD Standards Statements and Key Language Uses and make visible the language associated with the content areas. Language Expectations are the statements most similar to what educators generally find in academic content standards. • Proficiency Level Descriptors (PLDs) describe a continuum of language development for activities that target Language Expectations. They provide a detailed articulation of how students might develop language across the six levels of English language proficiency.
u120 The figure below shows the four components of the framework conceptualized as nested building blocks of language development within sociocultural contexts.
u121 The Components of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework
u122 WIDA ELD STANDARDS STATEMENTS conceptual framing of language and content integration
u123 KEY LANGUAGE USES prominent language uses across disciplines
u124 LANGUAGE EXPECTATIONS goals for content-driven language learning
u125 PROFICIENCY LEVEL DESCRIPTORS a continuum of language development across six levels
=== page 12 === [running header: 12 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u127 (x=72) The WIDA ELD Standards Statements
u128 (x=368) WIDA ELD STANDARDS STATEMENTS
u129 (x=72) The five standards statements represent the language of schooling and provide the broadest conceptual framing of content and language integration.
u130 (x=394) KEY LANGUAGE USES
u131 (x=384) LANGUAGE EXPECTATIONS
u132 (x=72) Each standard is shown in an abbreviated form in the table below. Hence ELD Standard 2: English language learners communicate information, ideas, and concepts necessary for academic success in the content area of Language Arts is abbreviated as Language for Language Arts and its reference code is ELD-LA.
u133 (x=370) PROFICIENCY LEVEL DESCRIPTORS
u134 Abbreviated forms of the Five English Language Development Standards Statements
u135 ELD Standard 1: Language for Social and Instructional Purposes (ELD-SI)
u136 ELD Standard 2: Language for Language Arts (ELD-LA)
u137 ELD Standard 3: Language for Mathematics (ELD-MA)
u138 ELD Standard 4: Language for Science (ELD-SC)
u139 ELD Standard 5: Language for Social Studies (ELD-SS)
u140 These abbreviated forms point to WIDA’s functional approach to language development, drawing attention to
u141 • The dynamic nature of language • Communicative purposes of the discipline or content area • The use of language to communicate and make meaning • Language use in the service of learning—in other words, language for thinking and doing
u142 Standard 1
u143 ELD Standard 1, Language for Social and Instructional Purposes, is broader in scope and applicability than the other four ELD Standards Statements that are associated with discipline-specific learning. ELD Standard 1 applies across a range of educational settings, and works both independently from and in conjunction with ELD Standards 2-5. Students communicate to learn but also to convey personal needs and wants, to affirm their own identities, and to form and maintain relationships.
u144 ELD Standard 1 encompasses the experiential, linguistic, and cultural backgrounds and identities of multilingual learners in relation to the other ELD Standards. It draws attention to multilingual learners’ positioning in the world that informs their meaning-making in the content areas. It reminds educators of strength-based approaches that meet students where they are in their own contexts, and to bridge the personal, social, and emotional to the academic.
=== page 13 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 13]
u146 Relationship among the WIDA ELD Standards
u147 [T1 R1 C1] Standard 3 Language for Mathematics
u148 [T1 R1 C2] Standard 4 Language for Science
u149 (x=114) Standard 1
u150 (x=195) Standard 2
u151 (x=439) Standard 5
u152 (x=115) Language for
u153 (x=198) Language for Language Arts
u154 (x=441) Language for Social Studies
u155 (x=121) Social and Instructional
u156 Purposes
u157 Standard 1 encompasses multilingual learners’ use of language in the following situations:
u158 • As they expand their linguistic repertoire from English language proficiency level 1 to level 6. ELD Standard 1 is not just for newcomers and young children, and it is not a precursor to learning disciplinary language. Rather, it encompasses opportunities for multilingual learners to develop language for social and instructional purposes at all language proficiency levels, all grade levels, and in all content areas. • Across all disciplines and school settings. Language for social and instructional purposes is foundational for engagement and learning in every discipline—from core disciplines like language arts and mathematics—to visual and performing arts; health and physical education; cross-disciplinary endeavors like use of technology, and library/media center time; and school- wide activities and events. Language is a part of the entire school day and all educators share responsibility for engaging multilingual learners in rich opportunities to simultaneously learn content and language. • Across numerous topics, tasks, and situations. ELD Standard 1 presents Language Expectations that apply to a range of activities and interactions. Some examples include setting classroom norms; establishing routines; following procedures; asking for clarification; discussing with peers; relating personal ideas, feelings, and views; and exploring languages, cultures, and perspectives. • While interacting with others. Language is, after all, a social practice that is dependent on an awareness of one’s own and others’ identities, as well as the unique roles and purposes that participants have in communicating with different members of a learning community—including peers, teachers, administrators, counselors, paraprofessionals, interpreters, family and community liaisons, other support staff, and visitors to the school. Interactive learning increases opportunities for multilingual learners to engage fully in content learning and leverage their assets as support for their academic achievements.
=== page 14 === [running header: 14 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u160 (x=72) Key Language Uses
u161 (x=368) WIDA ELD STANDARDS STATEMENTS
u162 (x=72) As part of developing the WIDA ELD Standards Framework, 2020 Edition, WIDA researchers analyzed academic content standards, research literature, and disciplinary practices. They also incorporated an understanding of genre families—categories of texts that share specific characteristics, such as purpose, organization, or other similar patterns of language use. From this research, WIDA has identified four Key Language Uses—Narrate, Inform, Explain, and Argue— that can be used to prioritize and organize the integration of content and language.1
u163 (x=394) KEY LANGUAGE USES
u164 (x=384) LANGUAGE EXPECTATIONS
u165 (x=370) PROFICIENCY LEVEL DESCRIPTORS
u166 (x=373) Four Key Language Uses
u167 (x=72) Key Language Uses exemplify the Big Idea: Functional Approach to Language Development. They emphasize language use for particular purposes, with particular audiences, and in particular sociocultural contexts. They
u168 (x=389) NARRATE
u169 (x=339) ARGUE
u170 (x=451) INFORM
u171 (x=72) • Bring focus and coherence to the language of schooling • Help educators make choices to prioritize and coordinate content and language integration • Serve as an organizing principle for the Language Expectations
u172 (x=390) EXPLAIN
u173 WIDA recognizes that Key Language Uses are one of many different configurations for connecting content to language through standards. The increased emphasis on genre-centered pedagogy (teaching that highlights genres as a way of organizing language use) provides a natural point for collaboration between content and language educators, with Key Language Uses serving as a focus for that partnership.
u174 Key Language Uses share some common aspects across disciplines, and yet each discipline also has unique ways of applying each. Below are brief definitions for each Key Language Use.
u175 • Narrate highlights language to convey real or imaginary experiences through stories and histories. Narratives serve many purposes, including to instruct, entertain, teach, or support argumentation. • Inform highlights language to provide factual information. As students convey information, they define, describe, compare, contrast, organize, categorize, or classify concepts, ideas, or phenomena.
u176 1 WIDA Key Language Uses have been updated: their definition is refined in the 2020 Edition to mean genre families. “Recount” has been separated into “Narrate” and “Inform.” “Discuss” is not a genre family, but it is threaded throughout all Key Language Uses and applies across all five ELD standards.
=== page 15 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 15]
u178 (x=72) • Explain highlights language to give an account for how things work or why things happen. As students explain, they substantiate the inner workings of natural, man-made, and social phenomena. • Argue highlights language to justify claims using evidence and reasoning. Argue can be used to advance or defend an idea or solution, change the audience’s point of view, bring about action, or accept a position or evaluation of an issue.
u179 (x=341) Genres are multimodal types of texts (oral, written, visual) that recur frequently for specific purposes, with specific discourse organization and language features (e.g., biographies).
u180 (x=341) Genres with similar characteristics (e.g., biographies, autobiographies, short stories) can be grouped together into genre families (e.g., narrate).
u181 (x=72) Key Language Uses can overlap and inform each other. Key Language Uses should not be considered strict categorical divisions. As genre families, Key Language Uses can intersect, blend, and build on each other. For example, as students develop complex explanations, they may inform (by naming, defining, describing, or comparing and contrasting something), and even narrate (e.g., by including an anecdote) as they work to help their audiences accurately understand the how or why of a concept (Explain). Narratives can be embedded within other expository structures, such as those in the families of Argue and Explain. Argue can incorporate elements of many Key Language Uses, as it seeks to show an audience the validity of a position or claim.
u182 (x=341) Key Language Uses reflect the most high-leverage genre families across academic content standards. They are Narrate, Inform, Explain, and Argue.
u183 (x=339) Key Language Uses can overlap and inform each other. As genre families, Key Language Uses can intersect, blend, and build on each other.
u184 (x=338) All Key Language Uses are present across all grade levels and disciplines. The emphasis placed on these four Key Language Uses is not intended to restrict curriculum and instruction; rather it accentuates the most prominent genre families as an organizing principle for the ELD Standards.
u185 (x=72) All Key Language Uses are present across all grade levels and disciplines, and yet at each grade-level cluster and discipline, some are more prominent than others. The emphasis placed on these four Key Language Uses is not intended to restrict curriculum and instruction; rather, it accentuates the most prominent genre families as an organizing principle for the ELD Standards. The most prominent Key Language Uses are the basis for its Language Expectations.
u186 The complete edition of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework provides a deep dive
u187 into the features of each Key Language Use across grades and disciplines. Visit Section 4: Resources—Key Language Uses: A Closer Look, and also Appendix C, which shows K-12 distribution tables of the most prominent Key Language Uses by grade-level cluster and WIDA ELD Standard.
=== page 16 === [running header: 16 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u189 (x=72) Language Expectations
u190 (x=368) WIDA ELD STANDARDS STATEMENTS
u191 (x=72) Language Expectations are goals for content-driven language instruction, adding specificity to the ELD Standards Statements and Key Language Uses. They are the statements most similar to what educators generally find in academic content standards. We’d like to call your attention to three aspects of Language Expectations: their reference codes, communication modes, Language Functions, and example Language Features.
u192 (x=394) KEY LANGUAGE USES
u193 (x=384) LANGUAGE EXPECTATIONS
u194 (x=370) PROFICIENCY LEVEL DESCRIPTORS
u195 Language Expectations: Reference Code
u196 As illustrated in the figure below, each Language Expectation has a reference code that includes the WIDA ELD Standard Statement (incorporating an academic content area), grade-level cluster, Key Language Use, and communication mode.
u197 Example Reference Code for a Language Expectation
u198 [T1 R1 C1] Mode of Communication: Expressive Key Language Use: Narrate Grade-Level Cluster ELD Standard: ELD-LA.2-3.Narrate.Expressive: Language for narratives that Language Arts • Orient audience to context
u199 [T1 R1 C2] Mode of Communication: Expressive
u200 [T1 R2 C1] ELD Standard: Language for Language Arts
u201 [T2 R1 C1] ELD-LA
u202 [T2 R1 C2] .2-3.
u203 [T2 R1 C3] Narrate
u204 [T2 R1 C4] .Expressive
u205 ELD-LA.2-3.Narrate.Expressive: Multilingual learners construct language arts
u206 • Develop story with time and event sequences, complication, resolution, or ending • Engage and adjust for audience
u207 Language Expectations: Communication Modes
u208 In the Language Expectations, the four individual language domains (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) are consolidated into two more inclusive modes of communication: interpretive and expressive.
u209 • The interpretive communication mode encompasses listening, reading, and viewing • The expressive communication mode encompasses speaking, writing, and representing
=== page 17 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 17]
u211 Modes of Communication
u212 (x=378) INTERPRETIVE
u213 (x=364) +Viewing
u214 (x=279) Listening
u215 (x=274) MODES OF COMMUNICATION
u216 (x=195) Writing
u217 (x=370) Reading
u218 (x=193) +Representing
u219 (x=278) Speaking
u220 (x=171) EXPRESSIVE
u221 These two broader modes of communication (interpretive and expressive) increase accessibility options for students and emphasize multimodal forms of communication (namely, by adding viewing in conjunction with listening and reading as well as representing in conjunction with speaking and writing).
u222 Language Expectations: Language Functions and Features
u223 (x=72) Developed from a systematic analysis of academic content standards, Language Expectations are built around a set of Language Functions. Language Functions are common patterns of language use that showcase particular ways students might use language to meet the purposes of schooling. For example, a series of Language Functions is associated with the process of constructing fictional narratives, informing peers of newly gained knowledge, explaining phenomena, or engaging in scientific argumentation.
u224 (x=366) Reminder: the most prominent Key Language Uses are the basis for its Language Expectations.
u225 The table on the next page presents the Language Expectation for ELD-LA.2-3.Narrate.Expressive. It contains three Language Functions that highlight common patterns of language use associated with Language Arts narratives in grades 2-3:
u226 • Orient audience to context • Develop story with time and event sequences, complication, and resolution • Engage and adjust for audience
=== page 18 === [running header: 18 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u228 In order to carry out particular Language Functions, language users rely on various language resources, including Language Features (e.g., types of sentences, clauses, phrases, and words). Together, the Language Functions and Features form a dynamic and illustrative set that shows some of the ways language works in service of content learning. The table below shows the Language Features that accompany the second Language Function from the Language Expectation ELD-LA.2-3.Narrate. Expressive.
u229 The Anatomy of a Language Expectation
u230 [T1 R1 C1] Language Expectation ELD-LA.2-3.Narrate.Expressive
u231 [T1 R2 C1] Stem Indicates interpretive or expressive mode
u232 [T1 R2 C2] Language Function Common patterns of language use associated with Key Language Uses (e.g., stages of the genre)
u233 [T1 R2 C3] Example Language Features Sample language resources that carry out specific Language Functions (e.g., different types of sentences, clauses, phrases, and words)
u234 [T1 R3 C1] Construct language arts narratives that…
u235 [T1 R3 C2] Develop story with time and event sequences, complication, resolution, or ending through…
u236 [T1 R3 C3] • Saying verbs (yelled, said, whispered) to add details about characters in dialogs • Verbs to describe what characters do, think, and feel • Pronouns, renaming, and synonyms to reference characters, situations, or ideas across the text (Miguel=my little brother=he; that night=the worst night) • Connectors to sequence time (first, next, and then), and events (before, after, later), and to combine and link event details (and, but, so)
u237 This close integration of content and language invites collaboration between content and language educators as they collectively share responsibility for teaching multilingual learners. Language development is its own field of expertise, just as each discipline is. As content and language teachers dive deeper into standards-based planning and delivery of instruction, language specialists can help content teachers learn more about Language Functions and Features. Similarly, content teachers can help language specialists connect to content learning.
=== page 19 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 19]
u239 (x=72) Proficiency Level Descriptors
u240 (x=368) WIDA ELD STANDARDS STATEMENTS
u241 (x=72) Proficiency Level Descriptors (PLDs) are a detailed articulation of multilingual learners’ growth in interpretive and expressive language across levels of English language proficiency.
u242 (x=394) KEY LANGUAGE USES
u243 (x=384) LANGUAGE EXPECTATIONS
u244 PROFICIENCY LEVEL DESCRIPTORS
u245 PLDs describe how multilingual learners use language toward the end of each language proficiency level (PL) until they reach PL6. PL6 is open ended: it indicates that for all of us, language development continues throughout life. Each end-of-level descriptor includes and builds on previous proficiency levels (e.g., PL4 = PL1 + PL2 + PL3 + PL4). Educators should scaffold learning and resources across all levels of language proficiency.
u246 For the purposes of representation and understanding, PLDs describe proficiency in a linear way. However, language development is not a straightforward linear process across proficiency levels; it is contingent on a variety of factors, including multilingual learners’ familiarity with the topic, audience, and situation. Therefore, multilingual learners may take various paths to develop and reach Language Expectations.
u247 (x=72) At any given point along their continua of language development, multilingual learners may demonstrate a range of abilities within and across each proficiency level. For example, they may speak at a higher proficiency level while write at an earlier proficiency level. A proficiency level does not categorize a multilingual learner (e.g., ‘a PL1 student’), but, rather, identifies snapshots of what a multilingual learner knows and can do at a particular stage of language development (e.g., ‘a student at PL1’ or ‘a student whose listening performance is at PL1’).
u248 (x=348) The relationship between Language Expectations and Proficiency Level Descriptors
u249 (x=348) Language Expectations offer goals for how all students might use language to meet academic content standards.
u250 (x=348) Proficiency Level Descriptors describe how multilingual learners might develop language across levels of English language proficiency as they move toward meeting Language Expectations.
u251 (x=72) PLDs maintain consistency with the K-12 Performance Definitions of the 2012 edition of the WIDA ELD Standards. As such, the PLDs continue to be written according to the three dimensions of language use: discourse, sentence, and word/phrase.
u252 The Dimensions of Language Use
u253 The dimensions of language use are one way to conceptualize the linguistic system within a sociocultural context. Language users make choices in all three dimensions of language that contribute to how a text is purposely constructed to have the desired effect on its intended audience(s).
=== page 20 === [running header: 20 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u255 The discourse dimension imparts overall meaning across an entire text, supported by the sentence and word/phrase dimensions. To consider how a language user constructs a meaningful message, begin by looking at the discourse dimension and the overarching message to see how language is organized to communicate particular ideas, how language holds ideas together in a text (its cohesion), and how loosely or tightly language is packed (its density).
u256 The sentence dimension contributes to the grammatical complexity of a text. Language users make choices in how they express ideas and their interrelationships through clauses in various sentences types. These also help shape how a text is sequenced and connected.
u257 The word/phrase dimension adds precision to communication. For example, language users strategically select everyday, cross-disciplinary, or technical language; employ multiple meanings and nuances of words and phrases; or play with their shades of meaning.
u258 Dimensions of Language within a Sociocultural Context
u259 Sociocultural
u260 Context
u261 Discourse
u262 Sentence
u263 Word/ Phrase
u264 Everyday language: language for representing ideas in nontechnical ways (e.g., dogs instead of canines)
u265 Cross-disciplinary language: common academic language used across content area contexts (e.g., analyze, evaluate, summarize)
u266 Technical language: specialized language associated with a content area such as science and history (e.g., mitosis, imperialism)
u267 The table on the next page updates the Features of Academic Language table (WIDA, 2014). It delineates five criteria across the three dimensions of language, framed within a sociocultural context. In addition to the dimensions and their criteria, the column to the far right presents sample features found in the PLDs.
=== page 21 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 21]
u269 Dimensions of Language in the Proficiency Level Descriptors:
u270 Criteria Foci and Sample Language Features
u271 The three language dimensions operate within sociocultural contexts for language use.
u272 [T1 R1 C1] Dimension
u273 [T1 R1 C2] Criteria
u274 [T1 R1 C3] Focus on . . .
u275 [T1 R1 C4] Sample Language Features
u276 [T1 R2 C1] Discourse
u277 [T1 R2 C2] Organization of language
u278 [T1 R2 C3] How ideas are coherently organized to meet a purpose through organizational patterns characteristic of the genre
u279 [T1 R2 C4] Whole text organizational patterns, such as introduction, body, conclusion; claim, evidence, reasoning
u280 [T1 R3 C2] Cohesion of language
u281 [T1 R3 C3] How language connects ideas within and across sentences and discourse using a range of cohesive devices
u282 [T1 R3 C4] Cohesive devices, such as repeated words, synonyms, pronoun substitution, connectors
u283 [T1 R4 C2] Density of language
u284 [T1 R4 C3] How information in noun groups is expanded or consolidated
u285 [T1 R4 C4] Noun groups expanded with resources, such as adjectives or other modifiers added before nouns, prepositional phrases following nouns, nominalization
u286 [T1 R5 C1] Sentence
u287 [T1 R5 C2] Grammatical complexity of language
u288 [T1 R5 C3] How relationships are expressed with clauses through simple, compound, and complex sentences
u289 [T1 R5 C4] Simple, compound, complex sentences; coordinating, subordinating conjunctions; dependent and independent clauses
u290 [T1 R6 C1] Word/Phrase
u291 [T1 R6 C2] Precision of language
u292 [T1 R6 C3] How everyday, cross- disciplinary, and technical language more effectively conveys precise meaning
u293 [T1 R6 C4] A variety of words and phrases, such as adverbials of time, manner, and place; verb types; abstract nouns
=== page 22 === [running header: 22 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u295 Applicable Uses of the WIDA Proficiency Level Descriptors
u296 Below are some non-exhaustive examples of ways the PLDs may be used.
u297 The PLDs might be used during
u298 • Collaboration between language development and content area educators • Professional learning activities about language development • School team discussions about the language growth of multilingual learners • Conversations with families in their preferred language
u299 The PLDs might be used to
u300 • Help design and scaffold classroom instruction and assessment tasks—as one tool among others • Support teacher and student discussions around language performance in relation to learning goals • Monitor progress of multilingual learners as they show language growth over time • Evaluate evidence from student work (portfolio of speaking and writing samples) as part of the eligibility process for special services
u301 Inapplicable Uses of the WIDA Proficiency Level Descriptors
u302 (x=72) The PLDs should not be used as restrictive examples or as a finite list of student abilities. Nor should they be used to limit access to complex texts and grade- level materials, participation in rigorous learning, or engagement in meaningful classroom discussions. Finally, the grade-level cluster PLDs should not be used to lower expectations or slow student growth.
u303 (x=366) The Proficiency Level Descriptors should not be used as a sole source to define or categorize a multilingual learner or teacher.
u304 PLDs should not be used as the single document or as the only evidence in high-stakes situations such as
u305 • Identification for special education services; for example in trying to obtain cognitive support services solely based on a student’s English language proficiency level • Description of cognitive ability • Identification of student readiness abilities • Tracking for remediation or enrichment • Grading in report cards • Consideration for grade placement or retention • Evaluation of teachers
=== page 23 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 23]
u307 The WIDA ELD Standards Framework: What It is and What It is Not
u308 The WIDA ELD Standards Framework, together with cross-disciplinary academic content standards and disciplinary practices, defines the language multilingual learners need as they move toward college, career, and civic readiness.
u309 The WIDA ELD Standards Framework does not—indeed, cannot—enumerate all or even most of the language of school. Use of the Standards Framework must therefore be complemented by a well- developed, content-rich curriculum and effective pedagogical approaches within an equitable educational program for multilingual learners (See the full WIDA ELD Standards Framework, Section 4: Resources—Collaborative Planning for Content and Language Integration: A Jump-Off Point for Curricular Conversations).
u310 What the WIDA ELD Standards Framework is and What It Is Not
u311 [T1 R1 C1] The WIDA ELD Standards Framework is
u312 [T1 R1 C2] The WIDA ELD Standards Framework is NOT intended to be
u313 [T1 R2 C1] • A description of clear and measurable goals for language learning represented by • Language Expectations for interpretive and expressive modes of communication • Grade-level cluster PLDs of what multilingual learners can do at consecutive language proficiency levels • A resource for state, district, and school accountability • A guide for informing the design of linguistically and culturally sustaining curriculum, instruction, and assessment • A central component of the comprehensive WIDA research- based system of language standards, assessment, and professional learning
u314 [T1 R2 C2] • Statements of grade-level knowledge and skills • A prescriptive document to be enacted without consideration for the local setting • A de facto curriculum or course of study • Specific lessons associated with units of learning with a series of language objectives • A step-by-step process for teaching and learning • An endorsement for any particular language pedagogy • A form of evaluation or a basis for grading • A compendium of academic content standards and disciplinary practices • Used in isolation, independent of grade- level content
=== page 24 === [running header: 24 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u316 Kindergarten Materials
u317 (x=72) WIDA recognizes that English language development occurs over multiple years, is variable, and depends on many factors, such as multilingual learners’ ages, maturation, classroom experiences, motivation, attitudes, and types of educational programming.
u318 (x=366) Grade-level cluster materials rely on a deep understanding of how language works in the service of content learning. Whereas we recognize that collaboration is not possible in every situation, partnerships between language and content teachers are critically important for planning and enacting curriculum, instruction, and assessment for multilingual learners.
u319 (x=72) With this in mind, we have developed sets of materials that are appropriate for students in different grade- level clusters (K, 1, 2-3, 4-5, 6-8, and 9-12). Within each grade-level cluster section, the materials are organized according to the components of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework, and include some additional resources. The grade-level cluster materials help educators enact the WIDA ELD Standards Framework.
=== page 25 ===
u321 (x=112) K
u322 (x=228) Kindergarten
u323 (x=231) Entering kindergarten is a big milestone for many children and their families. Children develop in different ways and at different rates, but in general, kindergartners tend to be quite active—playing, running, enjoying being silly, and making friends. Around this time, young
u324 (x=76) KINDERGARTEN
u325 children learn many new skills, from hopping on one foot, to holding a pencil, cutting with scissors, and recognizing colors, shapes, numbers, and letters. As kindergartners develop in social–emotional ways, they are also beginning to learn academic concepts through language and other multimodal means of communication.
u326 The physical, hands-on world of kindergartners fosters their language development. Make-believe, singing, dancing, and playing games create natural connections between school and home, where, bolstered by their families, multilingual learners interact in multiple languages and draw on their cultures and experiences to express feelings, tell stories, and enter the world of print.
u327 In this section you can find detailed, grade-level cluster specific information about the WIDA ELD Standards Framework. Remember that the WIDA ELD Standards Statements are the same from kindergarten through grade 12. Then, you will find the following materials for kindergarten:
u328 • The most prominent Key Language Uses
u329 • Language Expectations, Language Functions, and Language Features
u330 • Annotated Language Samples illustrating WIDA ELD Standards Statements, Language Expectations, Functions, and Features in authentic kindergarten texts
u331 • Proficiency Level Descriptors
u332 Grade-level Cluster 1 25
=== page 26 === [running header: 26 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u333 Key Language Uses
u334 Key Language Uses—Narrate, Inform, Explain, and Argue—are present across all grade levels and disciplines. The table below offers snapshots of some ways students engage in each Key Language Use throughout kindergarten.
u335 [T1 R1 C1] Snapshots of Key Language Uses in Kindergarten
u336 [T1 R2 C1] Narrate
u337 [T1 R2 C2] • Reflect on their lived experiences • Retell personal experiences • Create imaginative new stories through multimodal text, combining drawings and spelling approximations
u338 [T1 R3 C1] Inform
u339 [T1 R3 C2] • Describe observations about the world around them • Share observations about experiences and topics they know well • Compare and contrast information about individual entities • Categorize objects
u340 [T1 R4 C1] Explain
u341 [T1 R4 C2] • Wonder and ask questions about natural observable phenomena, such how caterpillars become butterflies • Construct pictorial representations of their emerging understandings of phenomena • Ask and answer how things work or why things are the way they are
u342 [T1 R5 C1] Argue
u343 [T1 R5 C2] • Express likes and dislikes on familiar topics, such as food and games • Express emotions stemming from personal experiences • Share opinions about issues from their own lives
u344 Learn more about each Key Language Use across the grades and disciplines in Section 4: Resources—Key Language Uses: A Closer Look, in the complete edition of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework.
=== page 27 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 27]
u346 The most prominent Key Language Uses in kindergarten are the basis for its Language Expectations. They are marked with a filled-in circle ( ● ) in the boxes of the table below. The half-filled circle and the open circle indicate lesser degrees of prominence of each Key Language Use; see the legend underneath the table.
u347 [T1 R1 C1] Distribution of Key Language Uses in Kindergarten
u348 [T1 R2 C1] WIDA ELD Standard
u349 [T1 R2 C2] Narrate
u350 [T1 R2 C3] Inform
u351 [T1 R2 C4] Explain
u352 [T1 R2 C5] Argue
u353 [T1 R3 C1] 1. Language for Social and Instructional Purposes
u354 [T1 R3 C2] ●
u355 [T1 R3 C3] ●
u356 [T1 R3 C4] ●
u357 [T1 R3 C5] ●
u358 [T1 R4 C1] 2. Language for Language Arts
u359 [T1 R4 C2] ●
u360 [T1 R4 C3] ●
u361 [T1 R4 C4] ●
u362 [T1 R4 C5] ●
u363 [T1 R5 C1] 3. Language for Mathematics
u364 [T1 R5 C2] ●
u365 [T1 R5 C3] ●
u366 [T1 R5 C4] ●
u367 [T1 R5 C5] ●
u368 [T1 R6 C1] 4. Language for Science
u369 [T1 R6 C2] ●
u370 [T1 R6 C3] ●
u371 [T1 R6 C4] ●
u372 [T1 R6 C5] ●
u373 [T1 R7 C1] 5. Language for Social Studies
u374 [T1 R7 C2] ●
u375 [T1 R7 C3] ●
u376 [T1 R7 C4] ●
u377 [T1 R7 C5] ●
u378 (x=170) ● Most Prominent
u379 (x=285) ● Prominent
u380 (x=373) ● Present
=== page 28 === [running header: 28 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u382 Language Expectations, Functions, and Features
u383 Language Expectations
u384 Language Expectations are interpretive and expressive goals for content-driven language learning. They articulate the language necessary for meeting academic content standards.
u385 Language Functions
u386 Language Expectations are built around a set of Language Functions. Language Functions highlight common patterns of language use, showcasing particular ways students might use language to meet the purposes of schooling. For example, a series of Language Functions is associated with the process of constructing fictional narratives, informing peers of newly gained knowledge, explaining phenomena, or engaging in scientific argumentation. In the figure on the next page, you can see that the Language Functions are listed in bulleted form, under the interpretive and expressive Language Expectations.
u387 Standard 1 Language Expectations and Language Functions
u388 Given its broad scope and applicability, Language Expectations and Language Functions for Standard 1 (Language for Social and Instructional Purposes) are presented in two wide-ranging spans, the first for grades K-3 and the second for grades 4-12. These are logical divisions between early childhood education and upper elementary years and beyond. Language Expectations and Functions for Standard 1 can be readily interwoven or paired with those in Standards 2-5 (Language for Language Arts, Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies). The pairing of Standard 1 with Standards 2-5 reminds us that students communicate as part of disciplinary learning, but also to convey personal needs and wants, to affirm their own identities, and to form and maintain relationships.
u389 Language Features
u390 The Language Functions of Standards 2-5 are further delineated with Language Features. In the figure on the next page, you can see sample Language Features for each Language Function, marked with a box (■). Language Features are examples of various language resources that carry out particular Language Functions, such as different types of sentences, clauses, phrases, and words. Due to the intertwining nature of Standard 1 with Standards 2-5, there are no specific Language Features for Standard 1.
u391 In the example here, you can see how the Language Features connect to the Language Functions in the expressive Language Expectations. Language Features are only shown in the expressive functions because those also help us see how learners have processed information through interpretive modes. For example, when multilingual learners share information about something they have heard, read, or viewed, we can use their expressive language skills to evaluate and guide our instructional choices.
u392 The figure on the next page shows how the Language Functions and Language Features appear.
=== page 29 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 29]
u394 Kindergarten Language Functions and Language Features
u395 [T1 R1 C1] K WIDA ELD STANDARD 2 Inform Language for Language Arts KINDERGARTEN Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will… ELD-LA .K .Inform .Interpretive ELD-LA .K .Inform .Expressive Interpret informational texts in language arts Construct informational texts in language arts (with prompting and support) by (with prompting and support) that ● Identifying main topic and key details ● Introduce topic for audience ● Asking and answering questions about ● Describe details and facts descriptions of familiar attributes and characteristics F ● Identifying word choices in relation to topic pa or content area Language Functions and Sample Language Features Introduce topic for audience through… ■ Pictures, words, title to identify topic ■ Pronouns to reference entity (farmers=they) ■ Oral recounting to share information (The farmers grow food.) Describe details and facts through… ■ Nouns to label visuals (fruit, oranges) ■ Verbs to label actions (farming) ■ Prepositional phrases to tell about where (on the farm, in the trees) ■ Visuals (labeled drawings) to support information
u396 [T1 R1 C2] Language unctions (common tterns of language use) appear here and again below Language Features (examples of language resources) appear here
u397 [T2 R1 C1] ELD-LA .K .Inform .Interpretive Interpret informational texts in language arts (with prompting and support) by ● Identifying main topic and key details ● Asking and answering questions about descriptions of familiar attributes and characteristics ● Identifying word choices in relation to topic or content area
u398 [T2 R1 C2] ELD-LA .K .Inform .Expressive Construct informational texts in language arts (with prompting and support) that ● Introduce topic for audience ● Describe details and facts
=== page 30 === [running header: 30 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u400 (x=94) K
u401 (x=160) WIDA ELD STANDARD 1
u402 (x=161) Social and Instructional Language
u403 (x=74) KINDERGARTEN
u404 The Language Expectations and Language Functions of Standard 1 are interwoven and paired with those of Standards 2-5. For this reason, remember that there are no specific Language Features for Standard 1, and that the expectations for the interpretive and expressive communication modes are the same. As you can see from the reference codes, the Language Expectations are the same for students in kindergarten through grade 3.
u405 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u406 Narrate
u407 ELD-SI.K-3.Narrate
u408 Share ideas about one’s own and others’ lived experiences and previous learning
u409 ●
u410 Connect stories with images and representations to add meaning
u411 ●
u412 Ask questions about what others have shared
u413 ●
u414 Recount and restate ideas
u415 ●
u416 Discuss how stories might end or next steps
u417 ●
u418 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u419 Inform
u420 ELD-SI.K-3.Inform
u421 Define and classify objects or concepts
u422 ●
u423 ●
u424 Describe characteristics, patterns, or behavior
u425 Describe parts and wholes
u426 ●
u427 Sort, clarify, and summarize ideas
u428 ●
u429 Summarize information from interaction with others and from learning experiences
u430 ●
=== page 31 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 31]
u432 (x=94) K
u433 (x=160) WIDA ELD STANDARD 1
u434 (x=161) Social and Instructional Language
u435 (x=74) KINDERGARTEN
u436 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u437 Explain
u438 ELD-SI.K-3.Explain
u439 Share initial thinking with others
u440 ●
u441 Follow and describe cycles in diagrams, steps in procedures, or causes and effects
u442 ●
u443 Compare and contrast objects or concepts
u444 ●
u445 Offer ideas and suggestions
u446 ●
u447 Act on feedback to revise understandings of how or why something works
u448 ●
u449 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u450 Argue
u451 ELD-SI.K-3.Argue
u452 Ask questions about others’ opinions
u453 ●
u454 Support own opinions with reasons
u455 ●
u456 Clarify and elaborate ideas based on feedback
u457 ●
u458 Defend change in one’s own thinking
u459 ●
u460 Revise one’s own opinions based on new information
u461 ●
=== page 32 === [running header: 32 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u463 (x=94) K
u464 (x=160) WIDA ELD STANDARD 2
u465 (x=424) Narrate
u466 (x=161) Language for Language Arts
u467 (x=74) KINDERGARTEN
u468 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u469 [T1 R1 C1] ELD-LA.K.Narrate.Interpretive Interpret language arts narratives (with prompting and support) by ● Identifying key details ● Identifying characters, settings, and major events ● Asking and answering questions about unknown words in a text
u470 [T1 R1 C2] ELD-LA.K.Narrate.Expressive Construct language arts narratives (with prompting and support) that ● Orient audience to story ● Describe story events
u471 Language Functions and Sample Language Features
u472 Orient audience to story through…
u473 Pictures, words, title, simple statements, or common story expressions to introduce context
u474 ■
u475 Noun groups to state who or what the story is about (tall man, baby bear)
u476 ■
u477 ■
u478 Prepositional phrases to specify location and time (at Grandma’s house, by the river; in the winter, at night)
u479 Describe story events through…
u480 ■
u481 Verbs to describe character actions (jumped), feelings (was sad), behaviors (eating)
u482 ■
u483 Connectors to establish sequence (then, after, and)
u484 Pronouns and renaming to reference a character across the text (the girl=she=Nancy)
u485 ■
=== page 33 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 33]
u487 (x=94) K
u488 (x=161) WIDA ELD STANDARD 2 Language for Language Arts
u489 (x=432) Inform
u490 (x=74) KINDERGARTEN
u491 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u492 [T1 R1 C1] ELD-LA.K.Inform.Interpretive Interpret informational texts in language arts (with prompting and support) by ● Identifying main topic and key details ● Asking and answering questions about descriptions of familiar attributes and characteristics ● Identifying word choices in relation to topic or content area
u493 [T1 R1 C2] ELD-LA.K.Inform.Expressive Construct informational texts in language arts (with prompting and support) that ● Introduce topic for audience ● Describe details and facts
u494 Language Functions and Sample Language Features
u495 Introduce topic for audience through…
u496 ■
u497 Pictures, words, title to identify topic
u498 ■
u499 Pronouns to reference entity (farmers=they)
u500 Oral recounting to share information (The farmers grow food.)
u501 ■
u502 Describe details and facts through…
u503 ■
u504 Nouns to label visuals (fruit, oranges)
u505 ■
u506 Verbs to label actions (farming)
u507 Prepositional phrases to tell about where (on the farm, in the trees)
u508 ■
u509 Visuals (labeled drawings) to support information
u510 ■
=== page 34 === [running header: 34 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u512 (x=94) K
u513 (x=161) WIDA ELD STANDARD 3 Language for Mathematics
u514 (x=432) Inform
u515 (x=74) KINDERGARTEN
u516 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u517 [T1 R1 C1] ELD-MA.K.Inform.Interpretive Interpret mathematical informational texts (with prompting and support) by ● Identifying concept or object ● Describing quantities and attributes
u518 [T1 R1 C2] ELD-MA.K.Inform.Expressive Construct mathematical informational texts (with prompting and support) that ● Define or classify concept or entity ● Describe a concept or entity ● Compare/contrast concepts or entities
u519 Language Functions and Sample Language Features
u520 Define or classify concept or entity through…
u521 Single nouns to represent class of things (colors, shapes, patterns)
u522 ■
u523 Relating verbs (be, have) to define, describe, or classify (The pattern is red, blue, red, blue.)
u524 ■
u525 Describe a concept or entity through…
u526 ■
u527 Expanded noun groups to add specificity (The red star has five points.)
u528 Sequential signals (first, second, then, last) to describe patterns (First is a green bear, then two blue bears.)
u529 ■
u530 ■
u531 Prepositional phrases (behind, on top of, under, next to, below, above) to specify location (The blue star is next to the green triangle.)
u532 Compare/contrast concepts or entities through…
u533 ■
u534 Comparison/contrast language (both, same, different) and pointing to differentiate between entities (This pattern is different than that one.)
u535 ■
u536 Causal language (because, so) and demonstration to provide reasoning (I can make a triangle because I have three sticks.)
=== page 35 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 35]
u538 (x=94) K
u539 (x=161) WIDA ELD STANDARD 4 Language for Science
u540 (x=433) Inform
u541 (x=74) KINDERGARTEN
u542 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u543 [T1 R1 C1] ELD-SC.K.Inform.Interpretive Interpret scientific informational texts by ● Determining what text is about ● Defining or classifying a concept or entity
u544 [T1 R1 C2] ELD-SC.K.Inform.Expressive Construct scientific informational texts that ● Introduce others to a topic or entity ● Provide details about an entity
u545 Language Functions and Sample Language Features
u546 Introduce others to a topic or entity through…
u547 Pictures, words, drawings to introduce others to the topic
u548 ■
u549 ■
u550 Generalized nouns to identify class of things (pollinators, insects)
u551 ■
u552 Pronouns (it, they) to reference entity or idea (insects=they) (demonstratives identify that this is a plant)
u553 ■
u554 Oral recounting to share information (The butterflies fly for a really long time.)
u555 Provide details about an entity through…
u556 Prepositional phrases to tell about where (in the trees, on the flowers, next to, above, below)
u557 ■
u558 Verbs to label actions (fly, grow, eat)
u559 ■
u560 ■
u561 Relating verbs (be, have) to define entity (Butterflies are pollinators. Butterflies have antennae.)
u562 ■
u563 Adjectives to add details (red and black wings)
u564 Pictures, labeled drawings, words to categorize, compare, and contrast information (moths=night, butterflies=day)
u565 ■
=== page 36 === [running header: 36 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u567 (x=94) K
u568 (x=161) WIDA ELD STANDARD 4 Language for Science
u569 (x=430) Explain
u570 (x=74) KINDERGARTEN
u571 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u572 [T1 R1 C1] ELD-SC.K.Explain.Interpretive Interpret scientific explanations by ● Defining investigable questions or simple design problems based on observations and data about a phenomenon ● Using information from observations to find patterns and to explain how or why a phenomenon occurs
u573 [T1 R1 C2] ELD-SC.K.Explain.Expressive Construct scientific explanations that ● Describe information from observations about a phenomenon ● Relate how a series of events causes something to happen ● Compare multiple solutions to a problem
u574 Language Functions and Sample Language Features
u575 Describe information from observations about a phenomenon through…
u576 Single words to identify context (floating, sinking)
u577 ■
u578 ■
u579 Relating verbs (have, be) to state relationships or attributes
u580 ■
u581 Pictures, diagrams, to add information or illustrate phenomenon
u582 Relate how a series of events causes something to happen through…
u583 Nouns to represent concepts (investigation)
u584 ■
u585 ■
u586 Simple sentences to describe the phenomenon (A feather floats.)
u587 ■
u588 Cohesion to reference ideas, people across text, including pronouns, articles, demonstratives (it, a, the, this, that)
u589 ■
u590 Causal connectors to combine ideas into logical relationships (so, because, when/then)
u591 ■
u592 Connectors to link or compare observations (Paper floats but rocks sink.)
u593 Compare multiple solutions to a problem through…
u594 Simple statements to represent conclusions (Heavy things float.)
u595 ■
=== page 37 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 37]
u597 (x=94) K
u598 (x=161) WIDA ELD STANDARD 5 Language for Social Studies
u599 (x=436) Inform
u600 (x=74) KINDERGARTEN
u601 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u602 [T1 R1 C1] ELD-SS.K.Inform.Interpretive Interpret informational texts in social studies by ● Determining topic associated with a compelling or supporting question ● Defining attributes and characteristics in relevant information
u603 [T1 R1 C2] ELD-SS.K.Inform.Expressive Construct informational texts in social studies that ● Introduce topic associated with a compelling or supporting question ● Provide a detail about relevant information
u604 Language Functions and Sample Language Features
u605 Introduce topic associated with a compelling or supporting questions through…
u606 ■
u607 Pictures, words, title to identify topic or concept (My Neighborhood, Activities)
u608 Visuals (labeled drawings, diagrams) to share information about topic attributes
u609 ■
u610 Provide a detail about relevant information through…
u611 ■
u612 Nouns to label visuals or cultural items (family members, weather words, food, events)
u613 ■
u614 Verbs to label actions and activities (dancing, cooking)
u615 Prepositional phrases to tell about location (on the block, in the house, next to the store, at Grandma’s house, on the bus)
u616 ■
u617 ■
u618 Adjectives to add description to labeled nouns and simple sentences (It is a sunny day.)
=== page 38 === [running header: 38 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u620 Annotated Language Samples
u621 Annotated Language Samples exemplify the WIDA ELD Standards Framework in action. In particular, they show an ELD Standards Statement, a Key Language Use, a Language Expectation, as well as its Language Functions and Language Features contextualized in authentic grade-level texts. The samples, drawn from the work of teachers and students from across the WIDA Consortium, help make more visible the language for content learning. In this way, educators can envision how to highlight language and plan for its systematic development during content learning.
u622 LEGEND FOR THE ANNOTATED TEXTS
u623 Several different conventions are used to indicate example Language Features in the annotated text:
u624 • Language Functions (bold white text on a blue background)
u625 • Connectors, sequence words (in bold)
u626 • Nouns and noun groups (in red with dashed underline)
u627 • Verbs and verb groups (in green with dotted underline)
u628 • Prepositional and adverbial phrases (in blue with diamond underline)
u629 • Objective/evaluative language (words or phrases) (in italics)
u630 • Cohesive devices (circles and arrows within the text)
u631 • Clauses (underlined and italics)
u632 • Sentences (highlighted with boxes around them) Note: Examples of sentences are declarative statements, statements of claims, statements foreshadowing events. See individual texts for more detail.
=== page 39 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 39]
u634 (x=94) K
u635 (x=160) WIDA ELD STANDARD 2
u636 (x=424) Narrate
u637 (x=161) Language for Language Arts
u638 (x=74) KINDERGARTEN
u639 Annotated Language Sample
u640 Context: This text was written by a multilingual kindergartner. At this time, students were writing every day about their lives or about books they were reading. This is the first of two texts presented here, written by the same kindergartner on two consecutive days. Both are modeled after a book the learner was reading.
u641 Prompt: It’s story writing time!
u642 Language Expectation: ELD-LA.K.Narrate.Expressive Multilingual learners use language to construct language arts narratives (with prompting and support) that • Orient audience to story • Describe story events
u643 [T1 R1 C1] Functions & Features
u644 [T1 R1 C3] Functions & Features
u645 [T1 R2 C1] Orient audience to story through… Simple statements • Brather … hopey Noun groups to introduce context • Brather [brother] • Mother
u646 [T1 R2 C2] Brather [Brother] is hopey [hoping]. Mother is hoee [home]. He will wear boots and a scarf.
u647 [T1 R2 C3] Describe story events through… Verbs (and verb groups) • is hopey [hoping] • will wear Pronoun to reference characters • Brather … he
u648 Example of Student Writing
=== page 40 === [running header: 40 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u650 (x=94) K
u651 (x=160) WIDA ELD STANDARD 4
u652 (x=429) Inform
u653 (x=161) Language for Science
u654 (x=74) KINDERGARTEN
u655 Annotated Language Sample
u656 Context: This is the second text written by the same multilingual kindergartner (the first is on the previous page). The student had been reading informational books about animals.
u657 Prompt: “Ok friends, it’s writing time! Get out your notebooks and pencils. Remember you can write about books you are reading.”
u658 Language Expectation: ELD-SC.K.Inform.Expressive Multilingual learners use language to construct scientific informational texts that • Introduce others to a topic or entity • Provide details about an entity
u659 [T1 R1 C1] Functions & Features
u660 [T1 R1 C3] Functions & Features
u661 [T1 R2 C1] Introduce others to the topic through… Generalized nouns • a gosling • a piglet • a calf • a wing • a tail • a nose
u662 [T1 R2 C2] A gosling has a wing. A piglet has a tail. A calf has a nose. … This horse is fast. This duck and this pig are slow.
u663 [T1 R2 C3] Provide details about an entity through… Relational verbs • has, is, are Adjectives to add details • fast • slow Noun groups to add details • a wing • a tail
u664 Example of Student Writing
=== page 41 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 41]
u666 Proficiency Level Descriptors
u667 Remember…
u668 Proficiency Level Descriptors (PLDs) illustrate a continuum of language development for multilingual learners across six levels of English language proficiency for each grade-level cluster. The descriptors span three dimensions of language: discourse, sentence, and word/phrase.
u669 • Each proficiency level (PL) includes and builds on previous levels (e.g., PL4 = PL1 + PL2 + PL3 + PL4). PL6 is open-ended. It indicates that for all of us, language development continues throughout life.
u670 • Language development is not a straightforward linear process across proficiency levels; it is contingent on a variety of factors. Multilingual learners may take various paths to develop language.
u671 • The PLDs are designed to be used in coordination with Language Expectations, Language Functions, and Language Features.
u672 • Whereas Language Expectations offer goals for how all students might use language to meet academic content standards, PLDs offer a succinct description of how multilingual learners might develop language across levels of language proficiency in moving toward meeting Language Expectations.
u673 • In the PLDs, text is multimodal, including oral, visual, and written forms.
u674 • Scaffolding learning increases accessibility for multilingual learners, supports and bolsters their opportunities to meaningfully engage in grade-level content learning, and builds toward independence. The PLDs are predicated on the idea that appropriate scaffolding supports students in moving through the language proficiency levels.
=== page 42 === [running header: 42 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u676 [T1 R1 C1] Level 6
u677 [T1 R1 C2] Understand how coherent texts (spoken, written, multimodal) are created…
u678 [T1 R1 C3] to meet a purpose in a short text
u679 [T1 R1 C4] Understand how ideas are connected across a whole text through…
u680 [T1 R1 C5] multiple types of cohesive devices (synonyms, antonyms, repetition)
u681 [T1 R1 C6] Understand how ideas are elaborated or condensed through…
u682 [T1 R1 C7] expanded noun groups with prepositional phrases (the red fire truck in the station)
u683 [T1 R1 C8] Understand how meanings are extended or enhanced through…
u684 [T1 R1 C9] multiple related simple sentences (She picked it up. She carried it to her room. She opened it up.)
u685 [T1 R1 C10] Understand how precise meanings are created through everyday, cross-disciplinary, and technical language through…
u686 [T1 R1 C11] a growing number of words and phrases in a variety of contexts (special visitor, school assembly)
u687 [T1 R2 C1] End of Level 5
u688 [T1 R2 C3] to meet a purpose in a series of extended sentences
u689 [T1 R2 C5] a few different types of cohesive devices (repetition, pronoun referencing, etc.)
u690 [T1 R2 C7] expanded noun groups with classifiers (the red fire truck)
u691 [T1 R2 C9] related simple sentences (She picked it up. She carried it to her room.)
u692 [T1 R2 C11] an increasing number of words and phrases (We need four different colors to make a pattern.)
u693 [T1 R3 C1] End of Level 4
u694 [T1 R3 C3] to meet a purpose (to inform, narrate, entertain) through multiple related sentences
u695 [T1 R3 C5] some frequently used cohesive devices (demonstratives: this, these, that, those)
u696 [T1 R3 C7] multi-word noun groups with connectors (a shiny truck and a red ball)
u697 [T1 R3 C9] simple sentences (She picked it up.)
u698 [T1 R3 C11] situation-specific words and phrases (What sounds do we hear?)
u699 [T1 R4 C1] End of Level 3
u700 [T1 R4 C3] around topics (all about me) with repetition, rhyming, and other language patterns with short sentences
u701 [T1 R4 C5] repetitive words and phrases across a text (Brown bear, brown bear, what do you see?)
u702 [T1 R4 C7] frequently used multi- word noun groups (my favorite book)
u703 [T1 R4 C9] chunks of language (sat in her chair, jumps on her bed)
u704 [T1 R4 C11] frequently used words and phrases in familiar contexts (time to clean up)
u705 [T1 R5 C1] End of Level 2
u706 [T1 R5 C3] around topics (all about me) with repetition, rhyming, and common language patterns
u707 [T1 R5 C5] patterned language with repetitive words and phrases (This is a duck. The duck says quack, quack. This is a goat.)
u708 [T1 R5 C7] frequently used single noun groups (my toys, my car, your ball?)
u709 [T1 R5 C9] words, pictures, phrases, and chunks of language (ran to her room)
u710 [T1 R5 C11] repeated words and phrases in familiar contexts and topics (sound it out, think first)
u711 [T1 R6 C1] End of Level 1
u712 [T1 R6 C3] around topics (my family) with words, pictures, phrases, or chunks of language
u713 [T1 R6 C5] patterned language with repetitive words
u714 [T1 R6 C7] labels with single nouns (ball, car)
u715 [T1 R6 C9] words, pictures, and phrases (Anna’s chair)
u716 [T1 R6 C11] a few words and phrases in familiar contexts and topics (map, desk, hello)
u717 [T1 R7 C1] Criteria
u718 [T1 R7 C2] DISCOURSE Organization of language
u719 [T1 R7 C4] DISCOURSE Cohesion of language
u720 [T1 R7 C6] DISCOURSE Density of language
u721 [T1 R7 C8] SENTENCE Grammatical complexity
u722 [T1 R7 C10] WORD, PHRASE Precision of language
u723 Grade K WIDA Proficiency Level Descriptors for the Interpretive Communication Mode (Listening, Reading, and Viewing)
u724 Toward the end of each proficiency level, when scaffolded appropriately, multilingual learners will…
=== page 43 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 43]
u726 [T1 R1 C1] Level 6
u727 [T1 R1 C2] Create coherent texts (spoken, written, multimodal) using…
u728 [T1 R1 C3] text that conveys an intended purpose with emerging organizational patterns (first, and then, also, next)
u729 [T1 R1 C4] Connect ideas across a whole text through…
u730 [T1 R1 C5] a growing number of cohesive devices (emerging use of articles to refer to the same word)
u731 [T1 R1 C6] Elaborate or condense ideas through…
u732 [T1 R1 C7] a growing number of types of elaboration (adding articles or demonstratives to a noun: the or these clouds)
u733 [T1 R1 C8] Extend or enhance meanings through…
u734 [T1 R1 C9] sentences with emerging use of clauses (My cat sleeps all day. My dog runs all the time. They are my pets.)
u735 [T1 R1 C10] Create precise meanings through everyday, cross-disciplinary, and technical language with…
u736 [T1 R1 C11] a growing repertoire of words and phrases with growing precision (green and yellow stripes)
u737 [T1 R2 C1] End of Level 5
u738 [T1 R2 C3] sentences linked together to convey an intended purpose (inform: The parrot eats nuts and seeds.)
u739 [T1 R2 C5] some formulaic cohesive devices (pronoun referencing)
u740 [T1 R2 C7] some types of elaboration (adding a newly learned adjective to a noun)
u741 [T1 R2 C9] simple sentences (Cats like to climb. Dogs like to run.)
u742 [T1 R2 C11] a small repertoire of words and phrases with developing precision (beautiful butterfly, repeating pattern)
u743 [T1 R3 C1] End of Level 4
u744 [T1 R3 C3] short sentences that convey an intended purpose with emerging organizational patterns
u745 [T1 R3 C5] some frequently used cohesive devices (demonstratives)
u746 [T1 R3 C7] a few types of elaboration (adding a familiar adjective to describe a noun)
u747 [T1 R3 C9] sentence fragments and emerging use of simple sentences (Dogs sleep, Dogs bark.)
u748 [T1 R3 C11] some frequently used words and phrases with some precision (my pattern is red, blue, red, blue)
u749 [T1 R4 C1] End of Level 3
u750 [T1 R4 C3] short sentences linked together to convey an intended purpose (and, then)
u751 [T1 R4 C5] a few frequently used cohesive devices (repetition: this leaf is red, this leaf is yellow)
u752 [T1 R4 C7] simple types of elaboration (newly learned single nouns)
u753 [T1 R4 C9] sentence fragments (cats and dogs)
u754 [T1 R4 C11] few frequently used words and phrases with emerging precision (lunch time, morning meeting)
u755 [T1 R5 C1] End of Level 2
u756 [T1 R5 C3] phrases or short sentences to represent ideas with an intended purpose (to describe, narrate, share opinion)
u757 [T1 R5 C5] an emerging use of cohesive devices (repetition: water, water, the water)
u758 [T1 R5 C7] simple elaboration (familiar single nouns)
u759 [T1 R5 C9] words, pictures, phrases and chunks of language (cats meow and dogs bark)
u760 [T1 R5 C11] emerging use of words and phrases with attempted precision (Today is Friday, September 15.)
u761 [T1 R6 C1] End of Level 1
u762 [T1 R6 C3] single words, phrases, or chunks of language to represent ideas
u763 [T1 R6 C5] single words and phrases related to topic (water, leaf)
u764 [T1 R6 C7] limited elaboration (single words)
u765 [T1 R6 C9] words, pictures, and phrases (cats and dogs)
u766 [T1 R6 C11] frequently reoccurring words and phrases (Good Morning, let’s play)
u767 [T1 R7 C1] Criteria
u768 [T1 R7 C2] DISCOURSE Organization of language
u769 [T1 R7 C4] DISCOURSE Cohesion of language
u770 [T1 R7 C6] DISCOURSE Density of language
u771 [T1 R7 C8] SENTENCE Grammatical complexity
u772 [T1 R7 C10] WORD, PHRASE Precision of language
u773 Grade K WIDA Proficiency Level Descriptors for the Expressive Communication Mode (Speaking, Writing, and Representing)
u774 Toward the end of each proficiency level, when scaffolded appropriately, multilingual learners will…
=== page 44 === [running header: 44 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u776 Collaborative Planning for Content and Language Integration: A Jump- Off Point for Curricular Conversations
u777 The WIDA ELD Standards Framework, working in tandem with academic content standards, defines the language multilingual learners need as they engage in learning and prepare for college, career, and civic lives. The framework upholds the goal of increasing equity for multilingual learners by promoting a culturally and linguistically sustaining approach to education and by providing common and visible language expectations in relation to grade-level academic content. Attending to how students use language in learning acknowledges that all learners are language learners, and all teachers are language teachers. For multilingual students, this attention to language use is especially critical.
u778 One of the framework’s functions is to serve as a guide for informing the design of curriculum and instruction for multilingual learners. To support this important work, we offer a springboard for discussion around collaborative planning for curricular integration of content and language. This example showcases initial steps educators can take to use components of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework to promote language development in content units of learning. Please visit the complete WIDA ELD Standards Framework, 2020 Edition, to consult the full section supporting collaborative curricular planning.
=== page 45 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster Kindergarten 45]
u780 The Destination: Setting Unit-Level Goals
u781 (x=174) Steps
u782 (x=377) Guiding Questions
u783 (x=100) 1. Locate relevant WIDA ELD Standards by examining the unit’s content standards
u784 (x=322) What content (e.g., disciplinary practices, concepts, topics) are students expected to learn?
u785 (x=100) 2. Identify the most prominent Key Language Uses by analyzing the unit’s content standards, summative assessments, essential questions, and main learning events
u786 (x=322) • How are students being asked to use language in the unit? • What Key Language Uses best reflect how students will interact with language?
u787 (x=100) 3. Use Language Expectations to create unit language goals
u788 (x=322) What Language Expectations best reflect the language focus of the unit?
u789 (x=100) 4. Unpack the Language Expectations, Functions, and Features in the context of your unit
u790 (x=322) What Language Functions and Features are essential for meeting content and language goals and the end-of-unit assessment?
u791 Getting There: Sequencing and Scaﬀolding Daily Lessons
u792 Considering the Language Expectations, Functions, and Features, sequence and adapt lesson
u793 plans for continuous language development and active scaﬀolding of student learning.
=== page 46 === [running header: 46 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
=== page 48 ===
u796 Download a complete copy of the WIDA English Language Development Standards, 2020 Edition, from the WIDA website: wida.wisc.edu/teach/standards/eld. Or purchase print copies from the WIDA store at
u797 www.wceps.org/Store.
u798 Find opportunities, webinars and resources to better understand the framework and the 2020 Edition
u799 on this webpage: https://wida.wisc.edu/grow/standards.
u800 Follow us and contribute to the conversation with #WIDAStandards
u801 wida.wisc.edu
