=== page 1 ===
u1 (x=247) WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition Kindergarten—Grade 12
u2 (x=104) GRADES
u3 (x=131) 2-3 Materials
u4 Promote equity for multilingual learners Teach language and content together
=== page 2 ===
u5 Suggested citation: WIDA. (2020). WIDA English language development standards framework, 2020 edition: Kindergarten– grade 12. Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System.
u6 © 2021 Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System WIDA is housed within the Wisconsin Center for Education Research at the University of Wisconsin-Madison
u7 Version 1.0
=== page 3 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 3]
u8 WIDA English Language
u9 Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition Kindergarten—Grade 12
u10 These materials are part of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework, 2020 Edition. The 2020 Edition offers several resources to support applications of the Framework, including materials that are geared specifically for grade-level clusters K, 1, 2-3, 4-5, 6-8, and 9-12.
u11 The complete 2020 Edition includes other useful resources for educators. Section 4, in particular, includes • Key Language Uses: A Closer Look • Collaborative Planning for Content and Language Integration: A Jump-Off Point for Curricular Conversations • A glossary of linguistic terms in the 2020 Edition
u12 Moreover, eight appendices offer valuable information for specific purposes and audiences • Appendix A: WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition—Meeting ESSA Title 1 Requirements • Appendix B: Correspondence Tables for Content and Language Standards • Appendix C: A Compilation of K-12 Key Language Use Distribution Tables and Language Expectations • Appendix D: A Compilation of K-12 Proficiency Level Descriptors, with Technical Notes • Appendix E: High-Level Comparison of WIDA Standards Editions From 2004 to 2020 • Appendix F: Theoretical Foundations of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework, 2020 Edition • Appendix G: Select References • Appendix H: Standards Development Process and Acknowledgments
u13 To download a complete copy of the WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition, visit the WIDA website at wida.wisc.edu/teach/standards/eld. Or, you can buy a print copy from the WIDA Store, at www.wceps.org/Store.
=== page 4 === [running header: 4 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u15 [T1 R4 C1] he WID
u16 [T1 R5 C1] Sta
u17 Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition
u18 WIDA has historically grounded its work in language development standards as a driver of equity for multilingual learners in curriculum, instruction, and assessment. This new edition reflects a continued commitment to these goals.
u19 Starting in 2004, all editions of the WIDA English Language Development (ELD) Standards have reflected the belief that multilingual learners are best served when they learn content and language together in linguistically and culturally sustaining ways. The 2020 Edition recommits to this belief by maintaining the five original WIDA ELD Standards Statements while adding new and expanded resources to address updates in policy, theory, and practice.
u20 WIDA ELD Standards Statements
u21 English Language Development Standard 1: English language learners communicate for Social and Instructional purposes within the school setting
u22 English Language Development Standard 2: English language learners communicate information, ideas, and concepts necessary for academic success in the content area of Language Arts
u23 English Language Development Standard 3: English language learners communicate information, ideas, and concepts necessary for academic success in the content area of Mathematics
u24 English Language Development Standard 4: English language learners communicate information, ideas, and concepts necessary for academic success in the content area of Science
u25 English Language Development Standard 5: English language learners communicate information, ideas, and concepts necessary for academic success in the content area of Social Studies
=== page 5 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 5]
u27 WIDA Mission, Vision, and Values
u28 WIDA draws its strength from its mission, vision, and values—the Can Do Philosophy, innovation, service, collaboration, and social justice. This belief system underscores the cultural, social, emotional, and experiential assets of multilingual learners, their families, and educators. It acts as a unifying force that gives the consortium its strength of conviction and action throughout the PreK-12 education community.
u29 Mission WIDA advances academic language development and academic achievement for children and youth who are culturally and linguistically diverse through high quality standards, assessments, research, and professional learning for educators.
u30 From English Language Learners to Multilingual Learners
u31 As part of its asset-based belief system, WIDA uses the term
u32 (x=247) “multilingual learners” to describe all students who come in contact with and/or interact in languages in addition to English on a regular basis. They include students who are commonly referred to as English language learners (ELLs), dual language learners (DLLs), newcomers, students with interrupted formal schooling (SIFE), long-term English learners (L-TELs), English learners with disabilities, gifted and talented English learners, heritage language learners, students with English as an additional language (EAL), and students who speak varieties of English or indigenous languages.
u33 (x=90) Multilingual learners refers to all children and youth who are, or have been, consistently exposed to multiple languages.
u34 Throughout the field of K-12 education, you will encounter various terms to describe multilingual learners. For example, ESSA (2015) uses the term “English learners” (ELs). For policy purposes, the five original WIDA ELD Standards Statements (2004) maintain the term “English language learners.” However, in an effort to encourage the field to use terminology that is asset-based and inclusive, WIDA began to use the term “multilingual learners.” You will see this term used throughout this document, starting with the Guiding Principles of Language Development on the next page.
=== page 6 === [running header: 6 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u36 WIDA Guiding Principles of Language Development (2019)
u37 The updated Guiding Principles of Language Development exemplify the overarching and ever-present WIDA Can Do Philosophy and emphasize the importance of language in learning. They highlight the four Big Ideas of the 2020 Edition.
u38 1. Multilingual learners’ languages and cultures are valuable resources to be leveraged for schooling and classroom life; leveraging these assets and challenging biases help develop multilingual learners’ independence and encourage their agency in learning.
u39 2. Multilingual learners’ development of multiple languages enhances their knowledge and cultural bases, their intellectual capacities, and their flexibility in language use.
u40 3. Multilingual learners’ language development and learning occur over time through meaningful engagement in activities that are valued in their homes, schools, and communities.
u41 4. Multilingual learners’ language, social-emotional, and cognitive development are inter-related processes that contribute to their success in school and beyond.
u42 5. Multilingual learners use and develop language when opportunities for learning take into account their individual experiences, characteristics, abilities, and levels of language proficiency.
u43 6. Multilingual learners use and develop language through activities which intentionally integrate multiple modalities, including oral, written, visual, and kinesthetic modes of communication.
u44 7. Multilingual learners use and develop language to interpret and access information, ideas, and concepts from a variety of sources, including real-life objects, models, representations, and multimodal texts.
u45 8. Multilingual learners draw on their metacognitive, metalinguistic, and metacultural awareness to develop effectiveness in language use.
u46 9. Multilingual learners use their full linguistic repertoire, including translanguaging practices, to enrich their language development and learning.
u47 10. Multilingual learners use and develop language to interpret and present different perspectives, build awareness of relationships, and affirm their identities.
u48 (x=367) BONJOUR
u49 (x=230) HOLA
u50 (x=173) Hello!
u51 (x=388) JAMBO
u52 (x=251) NILTZE
u53 (x=406) Hello!
u54 (x=229) Hello!
u55 (x=346) HALLO
u56 Hello!
u57 (x=271) Hello!
u58 (x=456) Hello!
=== page 7 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 7]
u60 (x=144) HOLA
u61 (x=209) BONJOUR
u62 (x=233) HELLO
u63 (x=116) NILTZE
u64 (x=131) HALLO
u65 (x=199) JAMBO
u66 Big Ideas of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework, 2020 Edition: Kindergarten–Grade 12
u67 This 2020 Edition of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework is anchored by four Big Ideas that are interwoven throughout the document. Like the Can Do Philosophy, they support the design of standards-based educational experiences that are student-centered, culturally and linguistically sustaining, and responsive to multilingual learners’ strengths and needs.
u68 Big Ideas in the 2020 Edition
u69 (x=191) EQUITY of Opportunity
u70 (x=344) INTEGRATION
u71 (x=352) of Content and
u72 (x=187) and Access
u73 (x=369) Language
u74 (x=344) FUNCTIONAL
u75 (x=153) COLLABORATION
u76 (x=353) APPROACH to Language Development
u77 (x=162) among Stakeholders
=== page 8 === [running header: 8 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u79 Equity of Opportunity and Access
u80 WIDA’s philosophy is rooted in equity and a commitment to supporting high-quality education for multilingual learners. This support for educational excellence is evident in WIDA’s vision, mission, and values—innovation, service, the Can Do Philosophy, collaboration, and social justice. As a WIDA value, social justice includes creating positive change, challenging discriminatory actions (i.e., in terms of language, culture, and race), and promoting equity to improve the education of multilingual children, youth, and families.
u81 Multilingual learners come from a wide range of cultural, linguistic, educational, and socioeconomic backgrounds and have many physical, social, emotional, experiential, and/or cognitive differences. All bring assets, potential, and resources to schools that educators must leverage to increase equity in standards-based systems. Increasing avenues of access, agency, and equity for all multilingual learners—including newcomers, students with interrupted formal schooling (SIFE), long-term English learners (L-TELs), students with disabilities, and gifted and talented English learners—requires educators to be knowledgeable, skillful, imaginative, and compassionate.
u82 The 2020 Edition of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework is here to guide educators to
u83 • Set high expectations for all students • Provide access for multilingual learners to rich, standards-based, grade-level content, including by scaffolding up (see the WIDA website for resources about scaffolding) • Enact linguistically and culturally sustainable pedagogies • Create opportunities for multilingual learners to • engage actively with each other in deep learning • access and use multiple languages, including through translanguaging
u84 When designing and delivering standards-based curriculum, instruction, and assessment, educators should consider multilingual learners’
u85 • Previous personal and educational experiences • Recency of arrival in the United States, if applicable • Diverse cognitive and behavioral strengths, needs, and abilities • Home and community • Languages and cultures
u86 Drawing on students’ linguistic and cultural resources is essential to helping them navigate life in a diverse world, in addition to supporting them in meeting demands of academic content areas as they advance through school.
u87 The 2020 Edition of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework upholds the goal of increasing equity for multilingual learners by providing common and visible language expectations in relation to grade-level academic content. These expectations also serve to increase coherence of policy and practice around the education of multilingual learners at federal, state, and local levels.
u88 Integration of Content and Language
u89 Earlier versions of the WIDA ELD Standards (2004, 2007, 2012) have historically represented the integration of content and language. The 2020 Edition makes the content–language connection more explicit and specific.
=== page 9 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 9]
u91 By content–language integration, we mean that multilingual learners develop content and language concurrently, with academic content as a context for language learning and language as a means for learning academic content.
u92 The 2020 Edition introduces several new ways of looking at the integration of content and language, for example, through Key Language Uses, Language Expectations, and Correspondence Tables for Content and Language Standards (Appendix B); all these (and more) are introduced later in this document.
u93 (x=372) In positioning the 2020 Edition to spotlight the variety of ways in which language is used in content area learning, WIDA is drawing educators’ attention to multimodality, the use of multiple means of communication. Multimodality is inherent to and essential for how students make meaning and engage in disciplinary practices. All students are able to both interpret and express ideas with greater flexibility when using
u94 (x=90) Multimodality, the use of multiple means of communication, is an essential way for all students to access and engage in the content areas. In addition to the use of spoken and written language, students also communicate through gestures, facial expressions, images, equations, maps, symbols, diagrams, charts, videos, graphs, computer-mediated content, and other means.
u95 multimodal resources, including multiple languages. Multimodality allows all students to use multiple means to engage, interpret, represent, act, and express their ideas in the classroom. For example, as students read, they also might refer to illustrations or diagrams, and as students write, they might also represent their ideas numerically or graphically.
u96 The integration of content and language for multilingual learners promotes
u97 • Understanding the connections between content and language • Making meaning within and across content areas (disciplines) • Interaction of students with each other in challenging content activities • Coordination of design and delivery of curriculum, instruction, and assessment
u98 Collaboration among Stakeholders
u99 (x=366) Collaboration among stakeholders (e.g., district and school leaders, content and language teachers, specialists, support personnel, students, families) is essential for providing multilingual learners high-quality educational experiences that are coordinated and comprehensive.
u100 (x=72) Districts and schools are complex educational systems with collaboration extending across stakeholders from classrooms, to schools, districts, and the families and communities of students. Stakeholders have different areas of expertise and are often responsible for different aspects of educational planning and delivery; however, collectively they are responsible for the success of multilingual learners.
u101 It is crucial for the academic success of multilingual learners that both language and content teachers and administrators see themselves as responsible for fostering the language development of multilingual learners, and for systems to move away from the idea that language specialists alone should assume sole responsibility for students’ language development.
=== page 10 === [running header: 10 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u103 Although different classrooms may have different instructional foci, all classrooms with multilingual learners must incorporate content and language development. Content teachers bring expertise in their discipline, while language teachers bring expertise in language development. Each teacher can contribute to deliver coordinated educational experiences for multilingual learners according to their own qualifications and areas of expertise. With sustained collaboration, language teachers expand their understanding of different content areas, and content teachers develop insights into and respond to the language development needs of multilingual learners.
u104 Content and language teachers can work together to
u105 • Plan and deliver grade-level standards-based instruction • Plan for systematic, explicit, and sustained language development alongside the academic demands of the content areas • Support one another • Share unique fields of expertise
u106 In this way, multilingual learners and their families benefit from a coherent and shared understanding of expectations and common goals for learning.
u107 (x=72) Functional Approach to Language Development
u108 (x=352) Language: a dynamic system used by particular communities for communicating with others. The choices we make with language enable us to accomplish many purposes (e.g., to represent experiences, share ideas, to enact roles and relationships, and act upon the world).
u109 (x=72) What does WIDA mean by a functional approach to language development? One metaphor for language is a toolbox, containing different tools that are used to communicate, to develop relationships, and to act upon the world. Like any good toolbox, the language toolbox contains various tools that function for different needs. Particular linguistic tools achieve certain purposes. For example, we make choices with language to reflect the topic at hand, the social roles and identities of those involved (am I talking to a college admissions interviewer or to my best friend?), and the needs of our listeners and readers. We make choices with language to organize our ideas in particular ways, to convey the relationships among these ideas, and about what types of words are most effective for our message. The explicit teaching of how language works can help multilingual learners expand what they can do with language, thereby growing their language toolbox. The result is that students become increasingly aware and strategic in their use of language to negotiate meaning and achieve their purposes in various contexts.
u110 (x=352) Language development: an interactive social process that occurs over time to expand what we can do with language.
u111 (x=352) Sociocultural context: the association of language with the culture and community in which it is used. In schools, it refers to the interaction among students and the classroom environment, along with the influences that shape the environment (e.g., purpose, topic, situation, participant’s identities and social roles, audience).
u112 To read more about all these Big
u113 Ideas, see the WIDA website.
=== page 11 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 11]
u115 Understanding the WIDA ELD Standards Framework
u116 Underpinned by the four Big Ideas, the WIDA ELD Standards Framework is a language development standards framework for K-12 academic settings.
u117 Sometimes people describe a standards framework as being like a map. In the same way that a map points out common, visible landmarks, a standards framework points out common, visible expectations for all students and helps to bring coherence across educational systems. The WIDA ELD Standards Framework is like a map in that it offers language expectations as destination points, as well as road signs to set goals for curriculum, instruction, and assessment for multilingual learners.
u118 The WIDA ELD Standards Framework consists of four components, each explored in the following pages. These four components are like building blocks of language development, and range from broad to narrow in scope. They work together to make a comprehensive picture of language development:
u119 • Five WIDA ELD Standards Statements provide the broadest conceptual framing and illustrate the integration of content and language. The standards statements show language use in the service of learning—in other words, language for thinking and doing. They address the language of schooling. • Key Language Uses describe prominent ways that language is used in school, across all disciplines. When educators make choices about how to integrate content and language, the Key Language Uses can help provide focus and coherence. • Language Expectations set goals for content-driven language learning. They add specificity to the ELD Standards Statements and Key Language Uses and make visible the language associated with the content areas. Language Expectations are the statements most similar to what educators generally find in academic content standards. • Proficiency Level Descriptors (PLDs) describe a continuum of language development for activities that target Language Expectations. They provide a detailed articulation of how students might develop language across the six levels of English language proficiency.
u120 The figure below shows the four components of the framework conceptualized as nested building blocks of language development within sociocultural contexts.
u121 The Components of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework
u122 WIDA ELD STANDARDS STATEMENTS conceptual framing of language and content integration
u123 KEY LANGUAGE USES prominent language uses across disciplines
u124 LANGUAGE EXPECTATIONS goals for content-driven language learning
u125 PROFICIENCY LEVEL DESCRIPTORS a continuum of language development across six levels
=== page 12 === [running header: 12 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u127 (x=72) The WIDA ELD Standards Statements
u128 (x=368) WIDA ELD STANDARDS STATEMENTS
u129 (x=72) The five standards statements represent the language of schooling and provide the broadest conceptual framing of content and language integration.
u130 (x=394) KEY LANGUAGE USES
u131 (x=384) LANGUAGE EXPECTATIONS
u132 (x=72) Each standard is shown in an abbreviated form in the table below. Hence ELD Standard 2: English language learners communicate information, ideas, and concepts necessary for academic success in the content area of Language Arts is abbreviated as Language for Language Arts and its reference code is ELD-LA.
u133 (x=370) PROFICIENCY LEVEL DESCRIPTORS
u134 Abbreviated forms of the Five English Language Development Standards Statements
u135 ELD Standard 1: Language for Social and Instructional Purposes (ELD-SI)
u136 ELD Standard 2: Language for Language Arts (ELD-LA)
u137 ELD Standard 3: Language for Mathematics (ELD-MA)
u138 ELD Standard 4: Language for Science (ELD-SC)
u139 ELD Standard 5: Language for Social Studies (ELD-SS)
u140 These abbreviated forms point to WIDA’s functional approach to language development, drawing attention to
u141 • The dynamic nature of language • Communicative purposes of the discipline or content area • The use of language to communicate and make meaning • Language use in the service of learning—in other words, language for thinking and doing
u142 Standard 1
u143 ELD Standard 1, Language for Social and Instructional Purposes, is broader in scope and applicability than the other four ELD Standards Statements that are associated with discipline-specific learning. ELD Standard 1 applies across a range of educational settings, and works both independently from and in conjunction with ELD Standards 2-5. Students communicate to learn but also to convey personal needs and wants, to affirm their own identities, and to form and maintain relationships.
u144 ELD Standard 1 encompasses the experiential, linguistic, and cultural backgrounds and identities of multilingual learners in relation to the other ELD Standards. It draws attention to multilingual learners’ positioning in the world that informs their meaning-making in the content areas. It reminds educators of strength-based approaches that meet students where they are in their own contexts, and to bridge the personal, social, and emotional to the academic.
=== page 13 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 13]
u146 Relationship among the WIDA ELD Standards
u147 [T1 R1 C1] Standard 3 Language for Mathematics
u148 [T1 R1 C2] Standard 4 Language for Science
u149 (x=114) Standard 1
u150 (x=195) Standard 2
u151 (x=439) Standard 5
u152 (x=115) Language for
u153 (x=198) Language for Language Arts
u154 (x=441) Language for Social Studies
u155 (x=121) Social and Instructional
u156 Purposes
u157 Standard 1 encompasses multilingual learners’ use of language in the following situations:
u158 • As they expand their linguistic repertoire from English language proficiency level 1 to level 6. ELD Standard 1 is not just for newcomers and young children, and it is not a precursor to learning disciplinary language. Rather, it encompasses opportunities for multilingual learners to develop language for social and instructional purposes at all language proficiency levels, all grade levels, and in all content areas. • Across all disciplines and school settings. Language for social and instructional purposes is foundational for engagement and learning in every discipline—from core disciplines like language arts and mathematics—to visual and performing arts; health and physical education; cross-disciplinary endeavors like use of technology, and library/media center time; and school- wide activities and events. Language is a part of the entire school day and all educators share responsibility for engaging multilingual learners in rich opportunities to simultaneously learn content and language. • Across numerous topics, tasks, and situations. ELD Standard 1 presents Language Expectations that apply to a range of activities and interactions. Some examples include setting classroom norms; establishing routines; following procedures; asking for clarification; discussing with peers; relating personal ideas, feelings, and views; and exploring languages, cultures, and perspectives. • While interacting with others. Language is, after all, a social practice that is dependent on an awareness of one’s own and others’ identities, as well as the unique roles and purposes that participants have in communicating with different members of a learning community—including peers, teachers, administrators, counselors, paraprofessionals, interpreters, family and community liaisons, other support staff, and visitors to the school. Interactive learning increases opportunities for multilingual learners to engage fully in content learning and leverage their assets as support for their academic achievements.
=== page 14 === [running header: 14 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u160 (x=72) Key Language Uses
u161 (x=368) WIDA ELD STANDARDS STATEMENTS
u162 (x=72) As part of developing the WIDA ELD Standards Framework, 2020 Edition, WIDA researchers analyzed academic content standards, research literature, and disciplinary practices. They also incorporated an understanding of genre families—categories of texts that share specific characteristics, such as purpose, organization, or other similar patterns of language use. From this research, WIDA has identified four Key Language Uses—Narrate, Inform, Explain, and Argue— that can be used to prioritize and organize the integration of content and language.1
u163 (x=394) KEY LANGUAGE USES
u164 (x=384) LANGUAGE EXPECTATIONS
u165 (x=370) PROFICIENCY LEVEL DESCRIPTORS
u166 (x=373) Four Key Language Uses
u167 (x=72) Key Language Uses exemplify the Big Idea: Functional Approach to Language Development. They emphasize language use for particular purposes, with particular audiences, and in particular sociocultural contexts. They
u168 (x=389) NARRATE
u169 (x=339) ARGUE
u170 (x=451) INFORM
u171 (x=72) • Bring focus and coherence to the language of schooling • Help educators make choices to prioritize and coordinate content and language integration • Serve as an organizing principle for the Language Expectations
u172 (x=390) EXPLAIN
u173 WIDA recognizes that Key Language Uses are one of many different configurations for connecting content to language through standards. The increased emphasis on genre-centered pedagogy (teaching that highlights genres as a way of organizing language use) provides a natural point for collaboration between content and language educators, with Key Language Uses serving as a focus for that partnership.
u174 Key Language Uses share some common aspects across disciplines, and yet each discipline also has unique ways of applying each. Below are brief definitions for each Key Language Use.
u175 • Narrate highlights language to convey real or imaginary experiences through stories and histories. Narratives serve many purposes, including to instruct, entertain, teach, or support argumentation. • Inform highlights language to provide factual information. As students convey information, they define, describe, compare, contrast, organize, categorize, or classify concepts, ideas, or phenomena.
u176 1 WIDA Key Language Uses have been updated: their definition is refined in the 2020 Edition to mean genre families. “Recount” has been separated into “Narrate” and “Inform.” “Discuss” is not a genre family, but it is threaded throughout all Key Language Uses and applies across all five ELD standards.
=== page 15 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 15]
u178 (x=72) • Explain highlights language to give an account for how things work or why things happen. As students explain, they substantiate the inner workings of natural, man-made, and social phenomena. • Argue highlights language to justify claims using evidence and reasoning. Argue can be used to advance or defend an idea or solution, change the audience’s point of view, bring about action, or accept a position or evaluation of an issue.
u179 (x=341) Genres are multimodal types of texts (oral, written, visual) that recur frequently for specific purposes, with specific discourse organization and language features (e.g., biographies).
u180 (x=341) Genres with similar characteristics (e.g., biographies, autobiographies, short stories) can be grouped together into genre families (e.g., narrate).
u181 (x=72) Key Language Uses can overlap and inform each other. Key Language Uses should not be considered strict categorical divisions. As genre families, Key Language Uses can intersect, blend, and build on each other. For example, as students develop complex explanations, they may inform (by naming, defining, describing, or comparing and contrasting something), and even narrate (e.g., by including an anecdote) as they work to help their audiences accurately understand the how or why of a concept (Explain). Narratives can be embedded within other expository structures, such as those in the families of Argue and Explain. Argue can incorporate elements of many Key Language Uses, as it seeks to show an audience the validity of a position or claim.
u182 (x=341) Key Language Uses reflect the most high-leverage genre families across academic content standards. They are Narrate, Inform, Explain, and Argue.
u183 (x=339) Key Language Uses can overlap and inform each other. As genre families, Key Language Uses can intersect, blend, and build on each other.
u184 (x=338) All Key Language Uses are present across all grade levels and disciplines. The emphasis placed on these four Key Language Uses is not intended to restrict curriculum and instruction; rather it accentuates the most prominent genre families as an organizing principle for the ELD Standards.
u185 (x=72) All Key Language Uses are present across all grade levels and disciplines, and yet at each grade-level cluster and discipline, some are more prominent than others. The emphasis placed on these four Key Language Uses is not intended to restrict curriculum and instruction; rather, it accentuates the most prominent genre families as an organizing principle for the ELD Standards. The most prominent Key Language Uses are the basis for its Language Expectations.
u186 The complete edition of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework provides a deep dive
u187 into the features of each Key Language Use across grades and disciplines. Visit Section 4: Resources—Key Language Uses: A Closer Look, and also Appendix C, which shows K-12 distribution tables of the most prominent Key Language Uses by grade-level cluster and WIDA ELD Standard.
=== page 16 === [running header: 16 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u189 (x=72) Language Expectations
u190 (x=368) WIDA ELD STANDARDS STATEMENTS
u191 (x=72) Language Expectations are goals for content-driven language instruction, adding specificity to the ELD Standards Statements and Key Language Uses. They are the statements most similar to what educators generally find in academic content standards. We’d like to call your attention to three aspects of Language Expectations: their reference codes, communication modes, Language Functions, and example Language Features.
u192 (x=394) KEY LANGUAGE USES
u193 (x=384) LANGUAGE EXPECTATIONS
u194 (x=370) PROFICIENCY LEVEL DESCRIPTORS
u195 Language Expectations: Reference Code
u196 As illustrated in the figure below, each Language Expectation has a reference code that includes the WIDA ELD Standard Statement (incorporating an academic content area), grade-level cluster, Key Language Use, and communication mode.
u197 Example Reference Code for a Language Expectation
u198 [T1 R1 C1] Mode of Communication: Expressive Key Language Use: Narrate Grade-Level Cluster ELD Standard: ELD-LA.2-3.Narrate.Expressive: Language for narratives that Language Arts • Orient audience to context
u199 [T1 R1 C2] Mode of Communication: Expressive
u200 [T1 R2 C1] ELD Standard: Language for Language Arts
u201 [T2 R1 C1] ELD-LA
u202 [T2 R1 C2] .2-3.
u203 [T2 R1 C3] Narrate
u204 [T2 R1 C4] .Expressive
u205 ELD-LA.2-3.Narrate.Expressive: Multilingual learners construct language arts
u206 • Develop story with time and event sequences, complication, resolution, or ending • Engage and adjust for audience
u207 Language Expectations: Communication Modes
u208 In the Language Expectations, the four individual language domains (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) are consolidated into two more inclusive modes of communication: interpretive and expressive.
u209 • The interpretive communication mode encompasses listening, reading, and viewing • The expressive communication mode encompasses speaking, writing, and representing
=== page 17 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 17]
u211 Modes of Communication
u212 (x=378) INTERPRETIVE
u213 (x=364) +Viewing
u214 (x=279) Listening
u215 (x=274) MODES OF COMMUNICATION
u216 (x=195) Writing
u217 (x=370) Reading
u218 (x=193) +Representing
u219 (x=278) Speaking
u220 (x=171) EXPRESSIVE
u221 These two broader modes of communication (interpretive and expressive) increase accessibility options for students and emphasize multimodal forms of communication (namely, by adding viewing in conjunction with listening and reading as well as representing in conjunction with speaking and writing).
u222 Language Expectations: Language Functions and Features
u223 (x=72) Developed from a systematic analysis of academic content standards, Language Expectations are built around a set of Language Functions. Language Functions are common patterns of language use that showcase particular ways students might use language to meet the purposes of schooling. For example, a series of Language Functions is associated with the process of constructing fictional narratives, informing peers of newly gained knowledge, explaining phenomena, or engaging in scientific argumentation.
u224 (x=366) Reminder: the most prominent Key Language Uses are the basis for its Language Expectations.
u225 The table on the next page presents the Language Expectation for ELD-LA.2-3.Narrate.Expressive. It contains three Language Functions that highlight common patterns of language use associated with Language Arts narratives in grades 2-3:
u226 • Orient audience to context • Develop story with time and event sequences, complication, and resolution • Engage and adjust for audience
=== page 18 === [running header: 18 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u228 In order to carry out particular Language Functions, language users rely on various language resources, including Language Features (e.g., types of sentences, clauses, phrases, and words). Together, the Language Functions and Features form a dynamic and illustrative set that shows some of the ways language works in service of content learning. The table below shows the Language Features that accompany the second Language Function from the Language Expectation ELD-LA.2-3.Narrate. Expressive.
u229 The Anatomy of a Language Expectation
u230 [T1 R1 C1] Language Expectation ELD-LA.2-3.Narrate.Expressive
u231 [T1 R2 C1] Stem Indicates interpretive or expressive mode
u232 [T1 R2 C2] Language Function Common patterns of language use associated with Key Language Uses (e.g., stages of the genre)
u233 [T1 R2 C3] Example Language Features Sample language resources that carry out specific Language Functions (e.g., different types of sentences, clauses, phrases, and words)
u234 [T1 R3 C1] Construct language arts narratives that…
u235 [T1 R3 C2] Develop story with time and event sequences, complication, resolution, or ending through…
u236 [T1 R3 C3] • Saying verbs (yelled, said, whispered) to add details about characters in dialogs • Verbs to describe what characters do, think, and feel • Pronouns, renaming, and synonyms to reference characters, situations, or ideas across the text (Miguel=my little brother=he; that night=the worst night) • Connectors to sequence time (first, next, and then), and events (before, after, later), and to combine and link event details (and, but, so)
u237 This close integration of content and language invites collaboration between content and language educators as they collectively share responsibility for teaching multilingual learners. Language development is its own field of expertise, just as each discipline is. As content and language teachers dive deeper into standards-based planning and delivery of instruction, language specialists can help content teachers learn more about Language Functions and Features. Similarly, content teachers can help language specialists connect to content learning.
=== page 19 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 19]
u239 (x=72) Proficiency Level Descriptors
u240 (x=368) WIDA ELD STANDARDS STATEMENTS
u241 (x=72) Proficiency Level Descriptors (PLDs) are a detailed articulation of multilingual learners’ growth in interpretive and expressive language across levels of English language proficiency.
u242 (x=394) KEY LANGUAGE USES
u243 (x=384) LANGUAGE EXPECTATIONS
u244 PROFICIENCY LEVEL DESCRIPTORS
u245 PLDs describe how multilingual learners use language toward the end of each language proficiency level (PL) until they reach PL6. PL6 is open ended: it indicates that for all of us, language development continues throughout life. Each end-of-level descriptor includes and builds on previous proficiency levels (e.g., PL4 = PL1 + PL2 + PL3 + PL4). Educators should scaffold learning and resources across all levels of language proficiency.
u246 For the purposes of representation and understanding, PLDs describe proficiency in a linear way. However, language development is not a straightforward linear process across proficiency levels; it is contingent on a variety of factors, including multilingual learners’ familiarity with the topic, audience, and situation. Therefore, multilingual learners may take various paths to develop and reach Language Expectations.
u247 (x=72) At any given point along their continua of language development, multilingual learners may demonstrate a range of abilities within and across each proficiency level. For example, they may speak at a higher proficiency level while write at an earlier proficiency level. A proficiency level does not categorize a multilingual learner (e.g., ‘a PL1 student’), but, rather, identifies snapshots of what a multilingual learner knows and can do at a particular stage of language development (e.g., ‘a student at PL1’ or ‘a student whose listening performance is at PL1’).
u248 (x=348) The relationship between Language Expectations and Proficiency Level Descriptors
u249 (x=348) Language Expectations offer goals for how all students might use language to meet academic content standards.
u250 (x=348) Proficiency Level Descriptors describe how multilingual learners might develop language across levels of English language proficiency as they move toward meeting Language Expectations.
u251 (x=72) PLDs maintain consistency with the K-12 Performance Definitions of the 2012 edition of the WIDA ELD Standards. As such, the PLDs continue to be written according to the three dimensions of language use: discourse, sentence, and word/phrase.
u252 The Dimensions of Language Use
u253 The dimensions of language use are one way to conceptualize the linguistic system within a sociocultural context. Language users make choices in all three dimensions of language that contribute to how a text is purposely constructed to have the desired effect on its intended audience(s).
=== page 20 === [running header: 20 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u255 The discourse dimension imparts overall meaning across an entire text, supported by the sentence and word/phrase dimensions. To consider how a language user constructs a meaningful message, begin by looking at the discourse dimension and the overarching message to see how language is organized to communicate particular ideas, how language holds ideas together in a text (its cohesion), and how loosely or tightly language is packed (its density).
u256 The sentence dimension contributes to the grammatical complexity of a text. Language users make choices in how they express ideas and their interrelationships through clauses in various sentences types. These also help shape how a text is sequenced and connected.
u257 The word/phrase dimension adds precision to communication. For example, language users strategically select everyday, cross-disciplinary, or technical language; employ multiple meanings and nuances of words and phrases; or play with their shades of meaning.
u258 Dimensions of Language within a Sociocultural Context
u259 Sociocultural
u260 Context
u261 Discourse
u262 Sentence
u263 Word/ Phrase
u264 Everyday language: language for representing ideas in nontechnical ways (e.g., dogs instead of canines)
u265 Cross-disciplinary language: common academic language used across content area contexts (e.g., analyze, evaluate, summarize)
u266 Technical language: specialized language associated with a content area such as science and history (e.g., mitosis, imperialism)
u267 The table on the next page updates the Features of Academic Language table (WIDA, 2014). It delineates five criteria across the three dimensions of language, framed within a sociocultural context. In addition to the dimensions and their criteria, the column to the far right presents sample features found in the PLDs.
=== page 21 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 21]
u269 Dimensions of Language in the Proficiency Level Descriptors:
u270 Criteria Foci and Sample Language Features
u271 The three language dimensions operate within sociocultural contexts for language use.
u272 [T1 R1 C1] Dimension
u273 [T1 R1 C2] Criteria
u274 [T1 R1 C3] Focus on . . .
u275 [T1 R1 C4] Sample Language Features
u276 [T1 R2 C1] Discourse
u277 [T1 R2 C2] Organization of language
u278 [T1 R2 C3] How ideas are coherently organized to meet a purpose through organizational patterns characteristic of the genre
u279 [T1 R2 C4] Whole text organizational patterns, such as introduction, body, conclusion; claim, evidence, reasoning
u280 [T1 R3 C2] Cohesion of language
u281 [T1 R3 C3] How language connects ideas within and across sentences and discourse using a range of cohesive devices
u282 [T1 R3 C4] Cohesive devices, such as repeated words, synonyms, pronoun substitution, connectors
u283 [T1 R4 C2] Density of language
u284 [T1 R4 C3] How information in noun groups is expanded or consolidated
u285 [T1 R4 C4] Noun groups expanded with resources, such as adjectives or other modifiers added before nouns, prepositional phrases following nouns, nominalization
u286 [T1 R5 C1] Sentence
u287 [T1 R5 C2] Grammatical complexity of language
u288 [T1 R5 C3] How relationships are expressed with clauses through simple, compound, and complex sentences
u289 [T1 R5 C4] Simple, compound, complex sentences; coordinating, subordinating conjunctions; dependent and independent clauses
u290 [T1 R6 C1] Word/Phrase
u291 [T1 R6 C2] Precision of language
u292 [T1 R6 C3] How everyday, cross- disciplinary, and technical language more effectively conveys precise meaning
u293 [T1 R6 C4] A variety of words and phrases, such as adverbials of time, manner, and place; verb types; abstract nouns
=== page 22 === [running header: 22 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u295 Applicable Uses of the WIDA Proficiency Level Descriptors
u296 Below are some non-exhaustive examples of ways the PLDs may be used.
u297 The PLDs might be used during
u298 • Collaboration between language development and content area educators • Professional learning activities about language development • School team discussions about the language growth of multilingual learners • Conversations with families in their preferred language
u299 The PLDs might be used to
u300 • Help design and scaffold classroom instruction and assessment tasks—as one tool among others • Support teacher and student discussions around language performance in relation to learning goals • Monitor progress of multilingual learners as they show language growth over time • Evaluate evidence from student work (portfolio of speaking and writing samples) as part of the eligibility process for special services
u301 Inapplicable Uses of the WIDA Proficiency Level Descriptors
u302 (x=72) The PLDs should not be used as restrictive examples or as a finite list of student abilities. Nor should they be used to limit access to complex texts and grade- level materials, participation in rigorous learning, or engagement in meaningful classroom discussions. Finally, the grade-level cluster PLDs should not be used to lower expectations or slow student growth.
u303 (x=366) The Proficiency Level Descriptors should not be used as a sole source to define or categorize a multilingual learner or teacher.
u304 PLDs should not be used as the single document or as the only evidence in high-stakes situations such as
u305 • Identification for special education services; for example in trying to obtain cognitive support services solely based on a student’s English language proficiency level • Description of cognitive ability • Identification of student readiness abilities • Tracking for remediation or enrichment • Grading in report cards • Consideration for grade placement or retention • Evaluation of teachers
=== page 23 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 23]
u307 The WIDA ELD Standards Framework: What It is and What It is Not
u308 The WIDA ELD Standards Framework, together with cross-disciplinary academic content standards and disciplinary practices, defines the language multilingual learners need as they move toward college, career, and civic readiness.
u309 The WIDA ELD Standards Framework does not—indeed, cannot—enumerate all or even most of the language of school. Use of the Standards Framework must therefore be complemented by a well- developed, content-rich curriculum and effective pedagogical approaches within an equitable educational program for multilingual learners (See the full WIDA ELD Standards Framework, Section 4: Resources—Collaborative Planning for Content and Language Integration: A Jump-Off Point for Curricular Conversations).
u310 What the WIDA ELD Standards Framework is and What It Is Not
u311 [T1 R1 C1] The WIDA ELD Standards Framework is
u312 [T1 R1 C2] The WIDA ELD Standards Framework is NOT intended to be
u313 [T1 R2 C1] • A description of clear and measurable goals for language learning represented by • Language Expectations for interpretive and expressive modes of communication • Grade-level cluster PLDs of what multilingual learners can do at consecutive language proficiency levels • A resource for state, district, and school accountability • A guide for informing the design of linguistically and culturally sustaining curriculum, instruction, and assessment • A central component of the comprehensive WIDA research- based system of language standards, assessment, and professional learning
u314 [T1 R2 C2] • Statements of grade-level knowledge and skills • A prescriptive document to be enacted without consideration for the local setting • A de facto curriculum or course of study • Specific lessons associated with units of learning with a series of language objectives • A step-by-step process for teaching and learning • An endorsement for any particular language pedagogy • A form of evaluation or a basis for grading • A compendium of academic content standards and disciplinary practices • Used in isolation, independent of grade- level content
=== page 24 === [running header: 24 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u316 Grade-level Cluster 2-3 Materials
u317 (x=72) WIDA recognizes that English language development occurs over multiple years, is variable, and depends on many factors, such as multilingual learners’ ages, maturation, classroom experiences, motivation, attitudes, and types of educational programming.
u318 (x=366) Grade-level cluster materials rely on a deep understanding of how language works in the service of content learning. Whereas we recognize that collaboration is not possible in every situation, partnerships between language and content teachers are critically important for planning and enacting curriculum, instruction, and assessment for multilingual learners.
u319 (x=72) With this in mind, we have developed sets of materials that are appropriate for students in different grade- level clusters (K, 1, 2-3, 4-5, 6-8, and 9-12). Within each grade-level cluster section, the materials are organized according to the components of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework, and include some additional resources. The grade-level cluster materials help educators enact the WIDA ELD Standards Framework.
=== page 25 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 25]
u321 (x=217) Grades 2-3
u322 (x=84) GRADES 2-3
u323 (x=218) Second- and third-graders continue to make leaps in the ways they use language and think about themselves, their peers, and the world. These students are becoming more coordinated physically, and their problem-solving skills continue to sprout. These young learners reason and use
u324 logic to make more in-depth connections, discover causes and effects of phenomena or events, do more complex math, and experiment with how they express themselves through speech, writing, and multimodal means of communication (for example, through gestures, facial expressions, drawings, charts, and technology).
u325 As multilingual learners explore specific activities that interest them, they can benefit from using all of their cultural experiences and multilingual skills—be it to communicate through social interactions or to tackle academic challenges. Children this age tend to enjoy being part of groups and teams and are generally eager to fit in. By partnering with families, educators can create culturally and linguistically sustaining classrooms so that all children feel welcome, nurtured, and safe, thus supporting their social and emotional development. As students in this age group are developmentally ready to start understanding various perspectives, this is an opportune time to highlight various cultures and languages in the classroom.
u326 In this section you can find detailed, grade-level cluster specific information about the WIDA ELD Standards Framework. Remember that the WIDA ELD Standards Statements are the same from kindergarten through grade 12. Then, you will find the following materials for grades 2-3:
u327 • The most prominent Key Language Uses
u328 • Language Expectations, Language Functions, and Language Features
u329 • Annotated Language Samples illustrating WIDA ELD Standards Statements, Language Expectations, Functions, and Features in authentic grade-level texts
u330 • Proficiency Level Descriptors
=== page 26 === [running header: 26 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u332 Key Language Uses
u333 Key Language Uses—Narrate, Inform, Explain, and Argue—are present across all grade levels and disciplines. The table below offers snapshots of some ways students engage in each Key Language Use throughout grades 2-3.
u334 [T1 R1 C1] Snapshots of Key Language Uses in Grades 2-3
u335 [T1 R2 C1] Narrate
u336 [T1 R2 C2] • Develop a sense of narrative structure and the purposes for which people use narratives • Structure narratives to express experiences and ideas about familiar places and people • Add interactions and reactions to characters’ actions to develop characters’ inner and outer worlds
u337 [T1 R3 C1] Inform
u338 [T1 R3 C2] • Recognize the difference between imaginative stories and nonfiction informational texts • Develop an emerging sense of text structure as they interpret and create multimodal representations of their knowledge on topics of interest • Develop emerging research skills to build knowledge for reports
u339 [T1 R4 C1] Explain
u340 [T1 R4 C2] • Develop a sense of some causal, sequential, and cyclical relationships by observing concrete phenomena • Report observations of phenomena to build understanding of the world around them • Interpret and construct multimodal representations, such as diagrams and drawings, to illustrate how or why things work
u341 [T1 R5 C1] Argue
u342 [T1 R5 C2] • State opinions or construct tentative claims and offer those in class discussions • Recognize the difference between claims with and without support • Offer observations to support opinions and claims • Develop emerging research skills to use in constructing claims • Begin to use data from observations as evidence for their claims
u343 Learn more about each Key Language Use across the grades and disciplines in Section 4: Resources—Key Language Uses: A Closer Look, in the complete edition of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework.
=== page 27 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 27]
u345 The most prominent Key Language Uses in grades 2-3 are the basis for its Language Expectations. They are marked with a filled-in circle ( ● ) in the boxes of the table below. The half-filled circle and the open circle indicate lesser degrees of prominence of each Key Language Use; see the legend underneath the table.
u346 [T1 R1 C1] Distribution of Key Language Uses in Grades 2-3
u347 [T1 R2 C1] WIDA ELD Standard
u348 [T1 R2 C2] Narrate
u349 [T1 R2 C3] Inform
u350 [T1 R2 C4] Explain
u351 [T1 R2 C5] Argue
u352 [T1 R3 C1] 1. Language for Social and Instructional Purposes
u353 [T1 R3 C2] ●
u354 [T1 R3 C3] ●
u355 [T1 R3 C4] ●
u356 [T1 R3 C5] ●
u357 [T1 R4 C1] 2. Language for Language Arts
u358 [T1 R4 C2] ●
u359 [T1 R4 C3] ●
u360 [T1 R4 C4] ●
u361 [T1 R4 C5] ●
u362 [T1 R5 C1] 3. Language for Mathematics
u363 [T1 R5 C2] ●
u364 [T1 R5 C3] ●
u365 [T1 R5 C4] ●
u366 [T1 R5 C5] ●
u367 [T1 R6 C1] 4. Language for Science
u368 [T1 R6 C2] ●
u369 [T1 R6 C3] ●
u370 [T1 R6 C4] ●
u371 [T1 R6 C5] ●
u372 [T1 R7 C1] 5. Language for Social Studies
u373 [T1 R7 C2] ●
u374 [T1 R7 C3] ●
u375 [T1 R7 C4] ●
u376 [T1 R7 C5] ●
u377 (x=170) ● Most Prominent
u378 (x=285) ● Prominent
u379 (x=373) ● Present
=== page 28 === [running header: 28 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u381 Language Expectations, Functions, and Features
u382 Language Expectations are interpretive and expressive goals for content-driven language learning. They articulate the language necessary for meeting academic content standards.
u383 Language Expectations are built around a set of Language Functions. Language Functions highlight common patterns of language use, showcasing particular ways students might use language to meet the purposes of schooling. For example, a series of Language Functions is associated with the process of constructing fictional narratives, informing peers of newly gained knowledge, explaining phenomena, or engaging in scientific argumentation. In the figure on the next page, you can see that the Language Functions are listed in bulleted form, under the interpretive and expressive language expectations.
u384 Given its broad scope and applicability, Language Expectations and Language Functions for Standard 1 (Language for Social and Instructional Purposes) are presented in two wide-ranging spans, the first for grades K-3 and the second for grades 4-12. These are logical divisions between early childhood education and upper elementary years and beyond. Language Expectations and Functions for Standard 1 can be readily interwoven or paired with those in Standards 2-5 (Language for Language Arts, Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies). The pairing of Standard 1 with Standards 2-5 reminds us that students communicate as part of disciplinary learning, but also to convey personal needs and wants, to affirm their own identities, and to form and maintain relationships.
u385 The Language Functions of Standards 2-5 are further delineated with Language Features. In the figure on the next page, you can see sample Language Features for each Language Function, marked with a box (■). Language Features are examples of various language resources that carry out particular Language Functions, such as different types of sentences, clauses, phrases, and words. Due to the intertwining nature of Standard 1 with Standards 2-5, there are no specific Language Features for Standard 1.
u386 In the example here, you can see how the Language Features connect to the Language Functions in the expressive Language Expectations. Language Features are only shown in the expressive functions because those also help us see how learners have processed information through interpretive modes. For example, when multilingual learners share information about something they have heard, read, or viewed, we can use their expressive language skills to evaluate and guide our instructional choices.
u387 The figure on the next page shows how the Language Functions and Language Features appear.
=== page 29 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 29]
u389 Grades 2-3 Language Functions and Language Features
u390 [T1 R1 C1] GRADES 2 3 WIDA ELD STANDARD 2 - Inform Language for Language Arts Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will… ELD-LA .2-3 .Inform .Interpretive ELD-LA .2-3 .Inform .Expressive Interpret informational texts in language Construct informational texts in language arts by arts that ● Identifying the main idea and key details ● Introduce and define topic and/or entity for audience ● Referring explicitly to descriptions for themes and relationships among ● Add details to define, describe, compare, p meanings and classify topic and/or entity ● Describing relationship between a ● Develop coherence and cohesion series of events, ideas or concepts, or throughout text procedural steps Language Functions and Sample Language Features Introduce and define topic and/or entity for audience through… ■ Descriptive title, generalized nouns to introduce topic and/or entity (The Mississippi River, Whales) ■ Opening statements to identify type of information (describing, comparing/contrasting, classifying) ■ Relating verbs (have, be, belong to) to define or describe topic and/or entity (Penguins are birds that cannot fly.) ■ Factual statements without evaluative language (brown caribou versus really cool caribou) Add details to define, describe, compare and classify topic or entity through… ■ Noun groups to add description and precision that answer questions about what something is like, or the color, shape, size (four bright blue eggs) ■ Prepositional phrases to describe place or location (next to the water, inside the Earth) ■ Timeless present verbs (swims, eats, migrates) to indicate generalizable nature of information ■ Visuals (drawings, labeled diagrams, graphics) to support key ideas ■ Signal words to show comparisons (bigger than, the fastest, more colorful, unlike, but, similar to, different from) Develop coherence and cohesion throughout text through… ■ Headings to organize information (Habitat, Diet, Parts of a Plant) ■ Pronouns (he, it, they), demonstratives (this, these, that, those), renaming (penguins=flightless birds=they) to reference ideas and entities across text ■ Single nouns to represent abstract concepts (habitat, ecosystem, watershed)
u391 [T1 R1 C2] Language Functions (common atterns of language use) appear here and again below Language Features (examples of language resources) appear here
u392 [T2 R1 C1] ELD-LA .2-3 .Inform .Interpretive Interpret informational texts in language arts by ● Identifying the main idea and key details ● Referring explicitly to descriptions for themes and relationships among meanings ● Describing relationship between a series of events, ideas or concepts, or procedural steps
u393 [T2 R1 C2] ELD-LA .2-3 .Inform .Expressive Construct informational texts in language arts that ● Introduce and define topic and/or entity for audience ● Add details to define, describe, compare, and classify topic and/or entity ● Develop coherence and cohesion throughout text
=== page 30 === [running header: 30 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u395 (x=77) GRADES 2-3
u396 (x=147) WIDA ELD STANDARD 1
u397 (x=147) Social and Instructional Language
u398 The Language Expectations and Language Functions of Standard 1 are interwoven and paired with those of Standards 2-5. For this reason, remember that there are no specific Language Features for Standard 1, and that the expectations for the interpretive and expressive communication modes are the same. As you can see from the reference codes, the Language Expectations are the same for students in kindergarten through grade 3.
u399 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u400 Narrate
u401 ELD-SI.K-3.Narrate
u402 Share ideas about one’s own and others’ lived experiences and previous learning
u403 ●
u404 Connect stories with images and representations to add meaning
u405 ●
u406 Ask questions about what others have shared
u407 ●
u408 Recount and restate ideas
u409 ●
u410 Discuss how stories might end or next steps
u411 ●
u412 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u413 Inform
u414 ELD-SI.K-3.Inform
u415 Define and classify objects or concepts
u416 ●
u417 Describe characteristics, patterns, or behavior
u418 ●
u419 Describe parts and wholes
u420 ●
u421 ●
u422 Sort, clarify, and summarize ideas
u423 Summarize information from interaction with others and from learning experiences
u424 ●
=== page 31 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 31]
u426 (x=77) GRADES 2-3
u427 (x=147) WIDA ELD STANDARD 1
u428 (x=147) Social and Instructional Language
u429 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u430 Explain
u431 ELD-SI.K-3.Explain
u432 Share initial thinking with others
u433 ●
u434 Follow and describe cycles in diagrams, steps in procedures, or causes and effects
u435 ●
u436 Compare and contrast objects or concepts
u437 ●
u438 Offer ideas and suggestions
u439 ●
u440 Act on feedback to revise understandings of how or why something works
u441 ●
u442 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u443 Argue
u444 ELD-SI.K-3.Argue
u445 Ask questions about others’ opinions
u446 ●
u447 ●
u448 Support own opinions with reasons
u449 Clarify and elaborate ideas based on feedback
u450 ●
u451 Defend change in one’s own thinking
u452 ●
u453 Revise one’s own opinions based on new information
u454 ●
=== page 32 === [running header: 32 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u456 (x=77) GRADES 2-3
u457 (x=147) WIDA ELD STANDARD 2
u458 (x=411) Narrate
u459 (x=147) Language for Language Arts
u460 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u461 [T1 R1 C1] ELD-LA.2-3.Narrate.Interpretive Interpret language arts narratives by ● Identifying a central message from key details ● Identifying how character attributes and actions contribute to event sequences ● Determining the meaning of words and phrases as they are used in texts, distinguishing literal from nonliteral language
u462 [T1 R1 C2] ELD-LA.2-3.Narrate.Expressive Construct language arts narratives that ● Orient audience to context ● Develop story with time and event sequences, complication, resolution, or ending ● Engage and adjust for audience
u463 Language Functions and Sample Language Features
u464 Orient audience to context through…
u465 ■
u466 Pictures, descriptive title, opening statements (It was a dark and stormy night; “What?!” exclaimed Mom) to capture the reader’s interest
u467 Expanded noun groups to introduce characters (the old man on the block, the hungry little mouse)
u468 ■
u469 ■
u470 Adverbials and prepositional phrases to establish time and location (a hundred years ago, when I was six, on the playground, around the corner)
u471 Statements to introduce problem or complication (The boat began to leak. It all started when…)
u472 ■
u473 Develop story with time and event sequences, complication, resolution, or ending through…
u474 Saying verbs (yelled, said, whispered) to add details about characters in dialogs
u475 ■
u476 ■
u477 Verbs to describe what characters do, think, and feel
u478 ■
u479 Pronouns, renaming, and synonyms to reference characters, situations, or ideas across the text (Miguel=my little brother=he; that night=the worst night)
u480 Connectors to sequence time (first, next, and then) and events (before, after, later), and to combine and link event details (and, but, so)
u481 ■
u482 Verbs and adjectives to judge behavior and situation (mended, destroyed, nasty, thoughtful)
u483 ■
u484 Declarative statements to provide closure (The End, It was over for good.)
u485 ■
u486 Engage and adjust for audience through…
u487 ■
u488 Language to address reader/listener and draw them in (It was so exciting!)
u489 Word choices to convey attitudes, develop suspense, share excitement (my amazing adventure, super interesting, fantastic!)
u490 ■
u491 ■
u492 Sensory and literary language (yucky), onomatopoeia (BOOM! CRASH!) to add interest
u493 ■
u494 Tone of voice, gesturing, acting behaviors to adjust for story audience
u495 Pictures and other graphics to complement storyline
u496 ■
=== page 33 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 33]
u498 (x=77) GRADES 2-3
u499 (x=147) WIDA ELD STANDARD 2
u500 (x=415) Inform
u501 (x=147) Language for Language Arts
u502 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u503 [T1 R1 C1] ELD-LA.2-3.Inform.Interpretive Interpret informational texts in language arts by ● Identifying the main idea and key details ● Referring explicitly to descriptions for themes and relationships among meanings ● Describing relationship between a series of events, ideas or concepts, or procedural steps
u504 [T1 R1 C2] ELD-LA.2-3.Inform.Expressive Construct informational texts in language arts that ● Introduce and define topic and/or entity for audience ● Add details to define, describe, compare, and classify topic and/or entity ● Develop coherence and cohesion throughout text
u505 Language Functions and Sample Language Features
u506 Introduce and define topic and/or entity for audience through…
u507 Descriptive title, generalized nouns to introduce topic and/or entity (The Mississippi River, Whales)
u508 ■
u509 Opening statements to identify type of information (describing, comparing/contrasting, classifying)
u510 ■
u511 ■
u512 Relating verbs (have, be, belong to) to define or describe topic and/or entity (Penguins are birds that cannot fly.)
u513 ■
u514 Factual statements without evaluative language (brown caribou versus really cool caribou)
u515 Add details to define, describe, compare, and classify topic or entity through…
u516 ■
u517 Noun groups to add description and precision that answer questions about what something is like, or the color, shape, size (four bright blue eggs)
u518 Prepositional phrases to describe place or location (next to the water, inside the Earth)
u519 ■
u520 ■
u521 Timeless present verbs (swims, eats, migrates) to indicate generalizable nature of information
u522 ■
u523 Visuals (drawings, labeled diagrams, graphics) to support key ideas
u524 Signal words to show comparisons (bigger than, the fastest, more colorful, unlike, but, similar to, different from)
u525 ■
u526 Develop coherence and cohesion throughout text through…
u527 Headings to organize information (Habitat, Diet, Parts of a Plant)
u528 ■
u529 ■
u530 Pronouns (he, it, they), demonstratives (this, these, that, those), renaming (penguins=flightless birds=they) to reference ideas and entities across text
u531 Single nouns to represent abstract concepts (habitat, ecosystem, watershed)
u532 ■
=== page 34 === [running header: 34 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u534 (x=77) GRADES 2-3
u535 (x=147) WIDA ELD STANDARD 3
u536 (x=412) Explain
u537 (x=147) Language for Mathematics
u538 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u539 [T1 R1 C1] ELD-MA.2-3.Explain.Interpretive Interpret mathematical explanations by ● Identifying concept or entity ● Analyzing plan for problem-solving steps ● Evaluating simple pattern or structure
u540 [T1 R1 C2] ELD-MA.2-3.Explain.Expressive Construct mathematical explanations that ● Introduce concept or entity ● Describe solution and steps used to solve problem with others ● State reasoning used to generate solution
u541 Language Functions and Sample Language Features
u542 Introduce a concept or entity through…
u543 Generalized nouns to identify concept (fractions, equations, plot graphs)
u544 ■
u545 Relating verbs (be, have) to define or describe concept (Fractions are pieces of a whole thing.)
u546 ■
u547 ■
u548 Mathematical terms to describe concept, process, purpose, or action (mean, quotient, divide, subtract, reduce)
u549 Describe solution and steps used to solve problem with others through…
u550 ■
u551 Abstract nouns to establish context (process, answer, approach, solution)
u552 ■
u553 Past tense doing (added, grouped) and thinking (thought, remembered) verbs to recount steps
u554 Visuals (charts, diagrams, manipulatives, drawings) to support approach and/or solution
u555 ■
u556 ■
u557 Connectors to order steps (first, next, then) and show causal relationships (because, so, then)
u558 ■
u559 Compare/contrast signal words to differentiate results, approaches, objects (Our solution is… but your group has a different solution.)
u560 State reasoning used to generate solution through…
u561 ■
u562 If/then clause structures to show reasoning (if a shape only has 3 sides, then it is a triangle)
u563 Declarative statements to state conclusion with a neutral stance of authority (This shows five 3rd-grade students jumped higher than the average of seven inches.)
u564 ■
u565 ■
u566 Thinking verbs to reflect on process (I wonder if we tried, if it would be different, I think we should have done…)
=== page 35 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 35]
u568 (x=77) GRADES 2-3
u569 (x=147) WIDA ELD STANDARD 3
u570 (x=417) Argue
u571 (x=147) Language for Mathematics
u572 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u573 [T1 R1 C1] ELD-MA.2-3.Argue.Interpretive Interpret mathematics arguments by ● Identifying conjectures about what might be true ● Distinguishing connections among ideas in justifications ● Extracting mathematical operations and facts from solution strategies to create generalizations
u574 [T1 R1 C2] ELD-MA.2-3.Argue.Expressive Construct mathematics arguments that ● Create conjecture using definitions ● Generalize commonalities across cases ● Justify conclusion steps and strategies in simple patterns ● Identify and respond to others’ arguments
u575 Language Functions and Sample Language Features
u576 Create conjecture using definitions through…
u577 Relating verbs (have, belong to, be) to make claim (A is bigger than B because it is taller.)
u578 ■
u579 Adverbial phrases (qualities, quantities, frequency) to add precision related to conjecture (All squares have 4 equal sides. Triangles always have 3 sides.)
u580 ■
u581 Generalize by finding commonalities across cases through…
u582 A variety of structures such as comparatives (er, est; more, most); demonstratives (these, both, that) to point out similarities (Both squares and rhombuses have 4 equal sides, ½ is bigger than ¼)
u583 ■
u584 Conditional structures (if/then, when) to draw conclusions (If 34+68=102 then 102-68=34, When a number is even you can divide it into two equal parts.)
u585 ■
u586 Justify conclusion steps and strategies in simple patterns through…
u587 Technical nouns to add precision and details (place value, communicative property, angles, measurement, fractions, even/odd)
u588 ■
u589 Causal connectors (because, so, that means) to present case to others (The taller rectangle isn’t always bigger because you have to look at the area inside.)
u590 ■
u591 Drawings, manipulatives, models, diagrams to support thinking
u592 ■
u593 Identify and respond to others’ arguments through…
u594 ■
u595 Questions (how, what, why) to ask for clarification or information (How did you get your answer?)
u596 ■
u597 Declarative statements to disagree/debate (I disagree, I’m not sure, I got a different answer…)
u598 Declarative statements to counter claim or reasoning (5-3 is not the same as 3-5, Just because it has 4 sides that doesn’t make it a square, the sides have to be equal)
u599 ■
=== page 36 === [running header: 36 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u601 (x=77) GRADES 2-3
u602 (x=147) WIDA ELD STANDARD 4
u603 (x=413) Explain
u604 (x=148) Language for Science
u605 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u606 [T1 R1 C1] ELD-SC.2-3.Explain.Interpretive Interpret scientific explanations by ● Defining investigable questions or simple design problems based on observations, data, and prior knowledge about a phenomenon ● Obtaining and combining information from observations, and using evidence to help explain how or why a phenomenon occurs ● Identifying information from observations as well as evidence that supports particular points in explanations
u607 [T1 R1 C2] ELD-SC.2-3.Explain.Expressive Construct scientific explanations that ● Describe observations and/or data about a phenomenon ● Develop a logical sequence between data or evidence and claim ● Compare multiple solutions to a problem considering how well they meet the criteria and constraints of the design solution
u608 Language Functions and Sample Language Features
u609 Describe observations and/or data about a phenomenon through…
u610 ■
u611 Abstract nouns and to introduce concepts (habitat)
u612 Declarative statements to present facts
u613 ■
u614 Cohesion to reference ideas, people across text (pronouns, renaming subject, demonstratives: this, that)
u615 ■
u616 ■
u617 Relating verbs to state relationships or attributes (have, be, belong to)
u618 Develop a logical sequence between data or evidence and claim through…
u619 ■
u620 Timeless verbs to state on-going facts about phenomenon (Rain forests create oxygen.)
u621 ■
u622 Connectors to sequence and order events across paragraphs (first, second, begins, ends)
u623 ■
u624 Causal connectors to link events (because, so that, when)
u625 ■
u626 Prepositional phrases to provide details (where, when, how)
u627 Clauses to express sequences in time (after digestion, when the air cools)
u628 ■
u629 Comparatives to show similarities and differences
u630 ■
u631 Compare multiple solutions to a problem considering how well they meet the criteria and constraints of the design solution through…
u632 Technical terminology (food chain, biome) to add precision
u633 ■
u634 ■
u635 Comparatives to show similarities and differences
u636 ■
u637 Connectors to sequence and order events across paragraphs (first, second, begins, ends)
u638 ■
u639 Causal connectors to link events (because, so that, when)
u640 ■
u641 Prepositional phrases to provide details about where, when, how
u642 Clauses to express sequences in time (after digestion, when the air cools)
u643 ■
=== page 37 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 37]
u645 (x=77) GRADES 2-3
u646 (x=147) WIDA ELD STANDARD 4
u647 (x=418) Argue
u648 (x=148) Language for Science
u649 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u650 [T1 R1 C1] ELD-SC.2-3.Argue.Interpretive Interpret scientific arguments by ● Identifying potential evidence from data, models, and/or information from investigations of phenomena or design solutions ● Analyzing whether evidence is relevant or not ● Distinguishing between evidence and opinions
u651 [T1 R1 C2] ELD-SC.2-3.Argue.Expressive Construct scientific arguments that ● Introduce topic/phenomenon for an issue related to the natural and designed world(s) ● Make a claim supported by relevant evidence ● Establish a neutral tone ● Signal logical relationships among reasoning, evidence, data, and/or a model when making a claim
u652 Language Functions and Sample Language Features
u653 Introduce topic/phenomenon for an issue related to the natural and designed world(s) through…
u654 Generalized nouns to interpret observations and evidence (heating, cooling, temperatures, Heating butter makes it melt.)
u655 ■
u656 ■
u657 Relating verbs (have, belong to, be) to define topic/phenomenon
u658 ■
u659 Nouns and adjectives to add precise technical descriptions (solid, liquid)
u660 Make a claim supported by relevant evidence through…
u661 A variety of clause structures to connect and combine ideas (If I add heat, I can melt butter. The butter melted because it got hot.)
u662 ■
u663 ■
u664 Labeled pictures, diagrams to support claim
u665 ■
u666 Verb groups to add precision to the claim and/or evidence (soften, harden, melt, cook, burn)
u667 Establish a neutral tone through…
u668 ■
u669 Declarative statements to state claim, observations, conclusion (Temperature changes materials.)
u670 ■
u671 Technical nouns to add precision and details (materials, reversible/irreversible changes)
u672 Signal logical relationships among reasoning, evidence, data, and/or a model when making a claim through…
u673 Reference devices (pronouns, synonyms, renaming subject) to create cohesion across text (Ice melts when it gets heated. It becomes water. Water turns to ice when it gets cold.)
u674 ■
u675 ■
u676 A variety of clause structures to explain phenomenon (because, but, when, like, so, so that)
=== page 38 === [running header: 38 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u678 (x=77) GRADES 2-3
u679 (x=147) WIDA ELD STANDARD 5
u680 (x=412) Explain
u681 (x=148) Language for Social Studies
u682 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u683 [T1 R1 C1] ELD-SS.2-3.Explain.Interpretive Interpret social studies explanations by ● Determining types of sources for answering compelling and supporting questions about phenomena or events ● Analyzing sources for event sequences and/or causes/effects ● Evaluating disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a compelling or supporting question
u684 [T1 R1 C2] ELD-SS.2-3.Explain.Expressive Construct social studies explanations that ● Introduce phenomena or events ● Describe components, order, causes, or cycles ● Generalize possible reasons for a development or event
u685 Language Functions and Sample Language Features
u686 Introduce phenomena or events through…
u687 Language to speak to the reader directly and draw them in (Did you know?)
u688 ■
u689 Prepositional phrases of time, place to contextualize phenomena or events
u690 ■
u691 ■
u692 Relating verbs (be, have) to define phenomena or events (Deserts are the driest places on earth)
u693 Pronouns and renaming to reference ideas and people across the text (explorers=Spaniards=they)
u694 ■
u695 ■
u696 Single nouns to represent abstract concepts (habitat, pollution)
u697 Describe components, order, causes, or cycles through…
u698 ■
u699 Connectors to establish relationships among ideas: sequence examples (first, another); time markers (after an earthquake, millions of years later); causality (because, so that)
u700 ■
u701 Prepositional phrases to add spatial and directional details (The river flows down the mountain.)
u702 Expanded noun groups that include adjectives to answer questions about how many, and what something is like (seven continents, longest river)
u703 ■
u704 ■
u705 Past tense verbs to describe events
u706 Adverbials to place event in time (last year, a long time ago, everyday)
u707 ■
u708 Generalize possible reasons for a development or event through…
u709 ■
u710 Declarative statements to evaluate and interpret events (The fish are dying because people throw trash in the ocean.)
u711 Verbs and adjectives to judge behavior or moral character (wasting, destroying, bad)
u712 ■
u713 ■
u714 Verbs to highlight agents and recipients
u715 Evaluative language to summarize event (best, important, dangerous, sad)
u716 ■
=== page 39 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 39]
u718 (x=77) GRADES 2-3
u719 (x=147) WIDA ELD STANDARD 5
u720 (x=417) Argue
u721 (x=148) Language for Social Studies
u722 Language Expectations: Multilingual learners will…
u723 [T1 R1 C1] ELD-SS.2-3.Argue.Interpretive Interpret social studies arguments by ● Identifying topic and purpose (argue in favor or against a position, present a balanced interpretation, challenge perspective) ● Analyzing relevant information from one or two sources to develop claims in response to compelling questions ● Evaluating source credibility based on distinctions between fact and opinion
u724 [T1 R1 C2] ELD-SS.2-3.Argue.Expressive Construct social studies arguments that ● Introduce topic ● Select relevant information to support claims with evidence from one or more sources ● Show relationships between claim, evidence, and reasoning
u725 Language Functions and Sample Language Features
u726 Introduce topic through…
u727 Title, generalized nouns to introduce topic (Important People, Nurses, Community Helpers)
u728 ■
u729 Declarative statement to present position and/or provide background information (Nurses are the most important people in our community.)
u730 ■
u731 ■
u732 Pronouns (they, we, us), demonstratives (these, this, that, those), and renaming subject (nurses=they=helpers) to reference topic across text
u733 Text connectors to sequence ideas, support (Three reasons why nurses are important. First…, Next…, Finally)
u734 ■
u735 Select relevant information to support claims with evidence from one or more sources through…
u736 Prepositional phrases to identify time, place, (last year, in January, in our town, at school)
u737 ■
u738 ■
u739 Past tense verbs to describe events (helped, fixed, took care of)
u740 ■
u741 Evaluative verbs, adverbs, and adjectives to add author’s perspective (helped, nicely, best)
u742 Show relationships between claim, evidence, and reasoning through…
u743 ■
u744 Connectors (because, so, and) to link claims with evidence and reasoning (Nurses are important because they help sick people feel better.)
u745 Connectors show concession or comparison/contrast (if, but; Some people don’t like shots but nurses do other things to help people.)
u746 ■
u747 Summary statements to reiterate position (That’s why nurses are important community helpers.)
u748 ■
=== page 40 === [running header: 40 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u750 Annotated Language Samples
u751 Annotated Language Samples exemplify the WIDA ELD Standards Framework in action. In particular, they show an ELD Standards Statement, a Key Language Use, a Language Expectation, as well as its Language Functions and Language Features contextualized in authentic grade-level texts. The samples, drawn from the work of teachers and students from across the WIDA Consortium, help make more visible the language for content learning. In this way, educators can envision how to highlight language and plan for its systematic development during content learning.
u752 LEGEND FOR THE ANNOTATED TEXTS
u753 Several different conventions are used to indicate example Language Features in the annotated text:
u754 • Language Functions (bold white text on a purple background)
u755 • Connectors, sequence words (in bold)
u756 • Nouns and noun groups (in red with dashed underline)
u757 • Verbs and verb groups (in green with dotted underline)
u758 • Prepositional and adverbial phrases (in blue with diamond underline)
u759 • Objective/evaluative language (words or phrases) (in italics)
u760 • Cohesive devices (circles and arrows within the text)
u761 • Clauses (underlined and italics)
u762 • Sentences (highlighted with boxes around them) Note: Examples of sentences are declarative statements, statements of claims, statements foreshadowing events. See individual texts for more detail.
=== page 41 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 41]
u764 (x=77) GRADES 2-3
u765 (x=147) WIDA ELD STANDARD 2
u766 (x=411) Narrate
u767 (x=147) Language for Language Arts
u768 Annotated Language Sample
u769 Context: This text was written by a multilingual student in grade 2. As part of the language arts program, the teacher asks students to write every day in a journal. This is a piece from that journal.
u770 Prompt: It is journal writing time. You can write about whatever you would like. Maybe you want to write a story, or some of you might want to write about characters from movies you like.
u771 Language Expectation: ELD-LA.2-3.Narrate.Expressive Multilingual learners use language to construct language arts narratives that • Orient audience to context • Develop story with time and event sequences, complication, resolution or ending • Engage and adjust for audience
u772 [T1 R1 C1] Functions & Features
u773 [T1 R1 C2] Olaf
u774 [T1 R1 C3] Functions & Features
u775 [T1 R2 C1] Orient audience to context through… Pictures Noun groups to introduce characters • Olaf Prepositional phrases to establish time and location • in Summer Engage and adjust for audience through… Word choices to convey attitudes • haveing fun
u776 [T1 R2 C2] This is Olaf he is playing in Summer with flowers and different animals he likes Summer he is haveing fun in Summer! Example of Student Writing
u777 [T1 R2 C3] Develop story with time and event sequences, complication, resolution or ending through… Verbs to describe what characters do • is playing • is haveing fun Verbs to describe what characters feel • likes Pronouns to reference characters • Olaf … he …. he … he
=== page 42 === [running header: 42 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u779 (x=77) GRADES 2-3
u780 (x=147) WIDA ELD STANDARD 4
u781 (x=413) Explain
u782 (x=147) Language for Science
u783 Annotated Language Sample
u784 Context: This text was written by a multilingual third grader. As the teacher worked on supporting students to develop explanations, she showed them how critical information was concentrated in the noun groups. Together, the class learned how to expand the noun groups to include details such as fewer sticky toe pads, the green anoles, etc. Students jointly constructed noun groups, comparing and contrasting which ones included sufficient information needed to communicate hereditary traits. After that, students wrote independently.
u785 Prompt: Which green anoles (a type of lizard) were most likely to be caught by the brown anoles? Why is that?
u786 Language Expectation: ELD-SC.2-3.Explain.Expressive Multilingual learners use language to construct scientific explanations that • Describe observations and/or data about a phenomenon • Develop a logical sequence between data or evidence and claim • Compare multiple solutions to a problem considering how well they meet the criteria and constraints of the design solution
u787 [T1 R1 C1] Functions & Features
u788 [T1 R1 C2] Green and Brown Anoles
u789 [T1 R1 C3] Functions & Features
u790 [T1 R2 C1] Describe observations and/ or data about a phenomenon through… Declarative statements to state present facts • The green anoles that were born … good. Cohesion to reference ideas across text • a brown anole … the brown anoles (renaming subject) Relating verbs to state attributes • are
u791 [T1 R2 C2] The green anoles that were born with fewer sticky toe scales are most likely to get caught by a brown anole because the brown anoles can’t climb that good.
u792 [T1 R2 C3] Develop a logical sequence between data or evidence and claim through… Causal connectors to link events • because Prepositional phrases to provide details • with fewer sticky toe scales • by a brown anole Comparatives to show similarities and differences • fewer • most likely • that good
=== page 43 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 43]
u794 Proficiency Level Descriptors
u795 Remember…
u796 Proficiency Level Descriptors (PLDs) illustrate a continuum of language development for multilingual learners across six levels of English language proficiency for each grade-level cluster. The descriptors span three dimensions of language: discourse, sentence, and word/phrase.
u797 • Each proficiency level (PL) includes and builds on previous levels (e.g., PL4 = PL1 + PL2 + PL3 + PL4). PL6 is open-ended. It indicates that for all of us, language development continues throughout life.
u798 • Language development is not a straightforward linear process across proficiency levels; it is contingent on a variety of factors. Multilingual learners may take various paths to develop language.
u799 • The PLDs are designed to be used in coordination with Language Expectations, Language Functions, and Language Features.
u800 • Whereas Language Expectations offer goals for how all students might use language to meet academic content standards, PLDs offer a succinct description of how multilingual learners might develop language across levels of language proficiency in moving toward meeting Language Expectations.
u801 • In the PLDs, text is multimodal, including oral, visual, and written forms.
u802 • Scaffolding learning increases accessibility for multilingual learners, supports and bolsters their opportunities to meaningfully engage in grade-level content learning, and builds toward independence. The PLDs are predicated on the idea that appropriate scaffolding supports students in moving through the language proficiency levels.
=== page 44 === [running header: 44 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u804 [T1 R1 C1] Level 6
u805 [T1 R1 C2] Understand how coherent texts (spoken, written, multimodal) are created…
u806 [T1 R1 C3] to meet a purpose through genre-specific organizational patterns (paragraph openers and topic sentences signaling relationships between paragraphs)
u807 [T1 R1 C4] Understand how ideas are connected across a whole text through…
u808 [T1 R1 C5] a wide variety of cohesive devices that connect ideas throughout text (whole/part, class/subclass, substitution: The rectangle is a big one.) and ellipsis (There isn’t any. [milk])
u809 [T1 R1 C6] Understand how ideas are elaborated or condensed through…
u810 [T1 R1 C7] expanded noun groups with a variety of embedded clauses (three little green tree frogs with long legs that swam away and didn’t come back)
u811 [T1 R1 C8] Understand how meanings are extended or enhanced through…
u812 [T1 R1 C9] compound sentences with frequently used ways of combining clauses (coordinating conjunctions: Anemones look like plants but they are sea animals.)
u813 [T1 R1 C10] Understand how precise meanings are created through everyday, cross-disciplinary, and technical language through…
u814 [T1 R1 C11] a variety of words and phrases such as adverbials of time, manner, and place; verb types; and abstract nouns (in the book about dolphins…)
u815 [T1 R2 C1] End of Level 5
u816 [T1 R2 C3] to meet a purpose through generic (not genre-specific) organizational patterns in texts (introduction, body, conclusion)
u817 [T1 R2 C5] a variety of cohesive devices that connect larger meaningful chunks of text (class/subclass: shapes like circles, triangles, and rectangles)
u818 [T1 R2 C7] expanded noun groups with embedded clauses (three little green tree frogs that jumped into the water)
u819 [T1 R2 C9] simple and compound sentences with familiar ways of combining clauses (using coordinating conjunctions: They are called anemones and they look like plants.)
u820 [T1 R2 C11] an expanding number of words and phrases, including idioms and collocations (plus and minus)
u821 [T1 R3 C1] End of Level 4
u822 [T1 R3 C3] to meet a purpose in a short text
u823 [T1 R3 C5] multiple cohesive devices (synonyms, antonyms)
u824 [T1 R3 C7] expanded noun groups with prepositional phrases (three little green tree frogs on the log)
u825 [T1 R3 C9] multiple related simple sentences (They are called anemones. They look like plants. They stick to rocks and coral.)
u826 [T1 R3 C11] a growing number of words and phrases in a variety of contexts (nonfiction books)
u827 [T1 R4 C1] End of Level 3
u828 [T1 R4 C3] to meet a purpose (to inform, narrate, argue or explain) in a series of extended sentences
u829 [T1 R4 C5] a few different types of cohesive devices (pronoun referencing, etc.)
u830 [T1 R4 C7] expanded noun groups with classifiers (tree frogs and poison frogs)
u831 [T1 R4 C9] related simple sentences (They look like plants. They stick to rocks and coral.)
u832 [T1 R4 C11] an increasing number of words and phrases (my favorite characters in this story)
u833 [T1 R5 C1] End of Level 2
u834 [T1 R5 C3] around specific topics (habitats, diet, behavior) with multiple related simple sentences
u835 [T1 R5 C5] frequently used cohesive devices (demonstratives: this, that, these, those)
u836 [T1 R5 C7] multi-word noun groups with connectors (green and slimy frogs)
u837 [T1 R5 C9] simple sentences (They stick to rocks and coral.)
u838 [T1 R5 C11] situation-specific words and phrases (How do we spell that word?)
u839 [T1 R6 C1] End of Level 1
u840 [T1 R6 C3] around general topics (continents, shapes, animals) with short sentences
u841 [T1 R6 C5] repetitive chunks of meaning across text (red crayon, yellow crayon, blue crayon)
u842 [T1 R6 C7] frequently used multi-word noun groups (green frogs)
u843 [T1 R6 C9] chunks of language (stick to rocks and coral)
u844 [T1 R6 C11] frequently used words and phrases in familiar contexts and topics (time to clean up)
u845 [T1 R7 C1] Criteria
u846 [T1 R7 C2] DISCOURSE Organization of language
u847 [T1 R7 C4] DISCOURSE Cohesion of language
u848 [T1 R7 C6] DISCOURSE Density of language
u849 [T1 R7 C8] SENTENCE Grammatical complexity
u850 [T1 R7 C10] WORD, PHRASE Precision of language
u851 Grades 2-3 WIDA Proficiency Level Descriptors for the Interpretive Communication Mode (Listening, Reading, and Viewing)
u852 Toward the end of each proficiency level, when scaffolded appropriately, multilingual learners will…
=== page 45 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 45]
u854 [T1 R1 C1] Level 6
u855 [T1 R1 C2] Create coherent texts (spoken, written, multimodal) using…
u856 [T1 R1 C3] text that conveys intended purpose using genre- specific organizational patterns (opinion and reasons; information and details)
u857 [T1 R1 C4] Connect ideas across a whole text through…
u858 [T1 R1 C5] a flexible number of cohesive devices (ellipsis, substitution/omission)
u859 [T1 R1 C6] Elaborate or condense ideas through…
u860 [T1 R1 C7] a wide variety of types of elaboration (adding in embedded clauses after the noun (those storm clouds that we saw yesterday)
u861 [T1 R1 C8] Extend or enhance meanings through…
u862 [T1 R1 C9] compound and complex sentences with frequently used ways of combining clauses (with a broad range of coordinating conjunctions: We put blue triangles, then red triangles, but there was no pattern.)
u863 [T1 R1 C10] Create precise meanings through everyday, cross-disciplinary, and technical language with…
u864 [T1 R1 C11] flexible repertoire of words and phrases such as adverbials of time, manner, and place; verb types; and abstract nouns with consistent precision (rounding off and finding the mean)
u865 [T1 R2 C1] End of Level 5
u866 [T1 R2 C3] expanding text that conveys intended purpose using generic (not genre- specific) organizational patterns across paragraphs (introduction, body, conclusion)
u867 [T1 R2 C5] an expanding number of cohesive devices (given/ new, whole/part, class/ subclass)
u868 [T1 R2 C7] a variety of types of elaboration (adding in a variety of adjectives)
u869 [T1 R2 C9] simple or compound sentences with familiar ways of combining clauses (with some coordinating conjunctions: We put blue triangles, then we put red triangles.)
u870 [T1 R2 C11] an expanding repertoire of words and phrases including idioms and collocations with expanding precision (hard as a rock)
u871 [T1 R3 C1] End of Level 4
u872 [T1 R3 C3] short text that conveys intended purpose using predictable organizational patterns (signaled with some paragraph openers: Last week, When I was five, I think, etc.)
u873 [T1 R3 C5] a growing number of cohesive devices (emerging use of articles to refer to the same word)
u874 [T1 R3 C7] a growing number of types of elaboration (adding articles or demonstratives to a noun: the or these clouds)
u875 [T1 R3 C9] sentences with emerging use of clauses (We put triangles, then rectangles)
u876 [T1 R3 C11] a growing repertoire of words and phrases with growing precision (preschool friends, math time, after lunch)
u877 [T1 R4 C1] End of Level 3
u878 [T1 R4 C3] sentences convey intended purpose with emerging organization (topic sentence, supporting details)
u879 [T1 R4 C5] some formulaic cohesive devices (pronoun referencing)
u880 [T1 R4 C7] some types of elaboration (adding a newly learned adjective to a noun)
u881 [T1 R4 C9] simple sentences (A square has 4 right angles.)
u882 [T1 R4 C11] a small repertoire of words and phrases with developing precision (best friend, the red ball)
u883 [T1 R5 C1] End of Level 2
u884 [T1 R5 C3] short sentences linked by topic to convey intended purpose
u885 [T1 R5 C5] some frequently used cohesive devices (demonstratives)
u886 [T1 R5 C7] a few types of elaboration (adding a familiar adjective to describe a noun)
u887 [T1 R5 C9] sentence fragments and emerging use of simple sentences (triangle has three sides)
u888 [T1 R5 C11] some frequently used words and phrases with some precision (three groups of four equals…)
u889 [T1 R6 C1] End of Level 1
u890 [T1 R6 C3] single words and phrases to represent ideas with an intended purpose (to inform, narrate, share opinion)
u891 [T1 R6 C5] few frequently used cohesive devices (repetition)
u892 [T1 R6 C7] Simple elaboration (single nouns)
u893 [T1 R6 C9] sentence fragments (triangles and rectangles)
u894 [T1 R6 C11] few frequently used words and phrases with emerging precision (Time to eat?)
u895 [T1 R7 C1] Criteria
u896 [T1 R7 C2] DISCOURSE Organization of language
u897 [T1 R7 C4] DISCOURSE Cohesion of language
u898 [T1 R7 C6] DISCOURSE Density of language
u899 [T1 R7 C8] SENTENCE Grammatical complexity
u900 [T1 R7 C10] WORD, PHRASE Precision of language
u901 Grades 2-3 WIDA Proficiency Level Descriptors for the Expressive Communication Mode (Speaking, Writing, and Representing)
u902 Toward the end of each proficiency level, when scaffolded appropriately, multilingual learners will…
=== page 46 === [running header: 46 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
=== page 47 === [running header: Grade-level Cluster 2-3 47]
u905 Collaborative Planning for Content and Language Integration: A Jump- Off Point for Curricular Conversations
u906 The WIDA ELD Standards Framework, working in tandem with academic content standards, defines the language multilingual learners need as they engage in learning and prepare for college, career, and civic lives. The framework upholds the goal of increasing equity for multilingual learners by promoting a culturally and linguistically sustaining approach to education and by providing common and visible language expectations in relation to grade-level academic content. Attending to how students use language in learning acknowledges that all learners are language learners, and all teachers are language teachers. For multilingual students, this attention to language use is especially critical.
u907 One of the framework’s functions is to serve as a guide for informing the design of curriculum and instruction for multilingual learners. To support this important work, we offer a springboard for discussion around collaborative planning for curricular integration of content and language. This example showcases initial steps educators can take to use components of the WIDA ELD Standards Framework to promote language development in content units of learning. Please visit the complete WIDA ELD Standards Framework, 2020 Edition, to consult the full section supporting collaborative curricular planning.
=== page 48 === [running header: 48 WIDA English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition]
u909 The Destination: Setting Unit-Level Goals
u910 (x=174) Steps
u911 (x=377) Guiding Questions
u912 (x=100) 1. Locate relevant WIDA ELD Standards by examining the unit’s content standards
u913 (x=322) What content (e.g., disciplinary practices, concepts, topics) are students expected to learn?
u914 (x=100) 2. Identify the most prominent Key Language Uses by analyzing the unit’s content standards, summative assessments, essential questions, and main learning events
u915 (x=322) • How are students being asked to use language in the unit? • What Key Language Uses best reflect how students will interact with language?
u916 (x=100) 3. Use Language Expectations to create unit language goals
u917 (x=322) What Language Expectations best reflect the language focus of the unit?
u918 (x=100) 4. Unpack the Language Expectations, Functions, and Features in the context of your unit
u919 (x=322) What Language Functions and Features are essential for meeting content and language goals and the end-of-unit assessment?
u920 Getting There: Sequencing and Scaﬀolding Daily Lessons
u921 Considering the Language Expectations, Functions, and Features, sequence and adapt lesson
u922 plans for continuous language development and active scaﬀolding of student learning.
=== page 50 ===
u924 Download a complete copy of the WIDA English Language Development Standards, 2020 Edition, from the WIDA website: wida.wisc.edu/teach/standards/eld. Or purchase print copies from the WIDA store at
u925 www.wceps.org/Store.
u926 Find opportunities, webinars and resources to better understand the framework and the 2020 Edition
u927 on this webpage: https://wida.wisc.edu/grow/standards.
u928 Follow us and contribute to the conversation with #WIDAStandards
u929 wida.wisc.edu
