=== page 1 === [running header: Other Social Studies Courses | §113.D. | Statutory Authority: The provisions of this §113.101 issued under the  | Source: The provisions of this §113.101 adopted to be effective August | Statutory Authority: The provisions of this §113.102 issued under the ]
u3 Chapter 113. Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills for Social Studies
u4 Subchapter D. Other Social Studies Courses
u5 §113.101. Implementation of Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills for Social Studies, Other Social Studies Courses.
u6 Implementation of the provisions of this subchapter begins with the effective date of the provision unless otherwise noted.
u9 §113.102. Advanced Placement (AP) United States History (One Credit).
u10 (a) General requirements. Students shall be awarded one credit for successful completion of this course. This course may be used to meet either the course requirement for U.S. History for state graduation or elective course requirements.
u11 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for Advanced Placement (AP) United States History are prescribed in the College Board Publication Advanced Placement Course in United States History, published by The College Board and in §113.41 of this title (relating to United States History Studies Since 1877 (One Credit), Adopted 2018).
u14 §113.103. Advanced Placement (AP) European History (One Credit).
u15 (a) General requirements. Students shall be awarded one credit for successful completion of this course. This course may not be used as a substitute for World History Studies.
u16 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for Advanced Placement (AP) European History are prescribed in the College Board Publication Advanced Placement Course in European History, published by The College Board.
u19 §113.104. Advanced Placement (AP) World History (One Credit).
u20 (a) General requirements. Students shall be awarded one credit for successful completion of this course. This course may be used as a substitute for World History Studies.
u21 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for Advanced Placement (AP) World History are prescribed in the College Board Publication Advanced Placement Course Description in World History, published by The College Board and in §113.42 of this title (relating to World History Studies (One Credit), Adopted 2018).
=== page 2 === [running header: Other Social Studies Courses | §113.D. | Statutory Authority: The provisions of this §113.105 issued under the  | Source: The provisions of this §113.105 adopted to be effective August | Statutory Authority: The provisions of this §113.106 issued under the ]
u28 §113.105. Advanced Placement (AP) Human Geography (One-Half to One Credit).
u29 (a) General requirements. Students shall be awarded either one-half credit or one credit for successful completion of this course. When completed for one credit, this course may be used as a substitute for World Geography Studies. When completed for one-half credit, this course may be used to meet only elective course requirements.
u30 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for Advanced Placement (AP) Human Geography are prescribed in the College Board Publication Advanced Placement Course Description in Human Geography, published by The College Board and in §113.43 of this title (relating to World Geography Studies (One Credit), Adopted 2018) when taught as a one credit course. Content requirements for AP Human Geography are prescribed in the College Board Publication Advanced Placement Course Description in Human Geography, published by The College Board when taught as a one-half credit course.
u33 §113.106. Advanced Placement (AP) U.S. Government and Politics (One-Half Credit).
u34 (a) General requirements. Students shall be awarded one-half credit for successful completion of this course. This course may be used to meet the course requirement in Government for state graduation.
u35 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for Advanced Placement (AP) U.S. Government and Politics are prescribed in the College Board Publication Advanced Placement Course in U.S. Government and Politics, published by The College Board and in §113.44 of this title (relating to United States Government (One-Half Credit), Adopted 2018).
u38 §113.107. Advanced Placement (AP) Comparative Government and Politics (One-Half Credit).
u39 (a) General requirements. Students shall be awarded one-half credit for successful completion of this course. This course may be used to meet only elective course requirements for state graduation.
u40 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for Advanced Placement (AP) Comparative Government and Politics are prescribed in the College Board Publication Advanced Placement Course in Comparative Government and Politics, published by The College Board.
u43 §113.108. Advanced Placement (AP) Psychology (One-Half Credit).
u44 (a) General requirements. Students shall be awarded one-half credit for successful completion of this course. This course may be used to meet only elective course requirements for state graduation.
u45 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for Advanced Placement (AP) Psychology are prescribed in the College Board Publication Advanced Placement Course in Psychology, published by The College Board.
=== page 3 === [running header: Other Social Studies Courses | §113.D. | Statutory Authority: The provisions of this §113.109 issued under the  | Source: The provisions of this §113.109 adopted to be effective August | Statutory Authority: The provisions of this §113.110 issued under the ]
u52 §113.109. International Baccalaureate (IB) History Standard Level (SL) (Two Credits).
u53 (a) General requirements. Students shall be awarded two credits for successful completion of this course. This course may be used to meet only elective course requirements for state graduation.
u54 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for IB History SL are prescribed by the International Baccalaureate Organization. Subject guides may be obtained from International Baccalaureate of North America.
u57 §113.110. International Baccalaureate (IB) History of Africa and the Middle East Higher Level (HL) (Two Credits).
u58 (a) General requirements. Students shall be awarded two credits for successful completion of this course. This course may be used to meet only elective course requirements for state graduation.
u59 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for IB History of Africa and the Middle East HL are prescribed by the International Baccalaureate Organization. Subject guides may be obtained from International Baccalaureate of North America.
u62 §113.111. International Baccalaureate (IB) History of the Americas Higher Level (HL) (Two Credits).
u63 (a) General requirements. Students shall be awarded two credits for successful completion of this course. One credit may be used to meet the course requirement in United States history for state graduation; the other credit may be used to meet only elective course requirements for state graduation.
u64 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for IB History of the Americas HL are prescribed by the International Baccalaureate Organization. Subject guides may be obtained from International Baccalaureate of North America and in §113.41 of this title (relating to United States History Studies Since 1877 (One Credit), Adopted 2018).
u67 §113.112. International Baccalaureate (IB) History of Asia and Oceania Higher Level (HL) (Two Credits).
u68 (a) General requirements. Students shall be awarded two credits for successful completion of this course. This course may be used to meet only elective course requirements for state graduation.
u69 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for IB History of Asia and Oceania HL are prescribed by the International Baccalaureate Organization. Subject guides may be obtained from International Baccalaureate of North America.
u72 §113.113. International Baccalaureate (IB) History of Europe Higher Level (HL) (Two Credits).
u73 (a) General requirements. Students shall be awarded two credits for successful completion of this course. This course may be used to meet only elective course requirements for state graduation.
=== page 4 === [running header: Other Social Studies Courses | §113.D. | Statutory Authority: The provisions of this §113.113 issued under the  | Source: The provisions of this §113.113 adopted to be effective August | Statutory Authority: The provisions of this §113.114 issued under the ]
u78 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for IB History of Europe HL are prescribed by the International Baccalaureate Organization. Subject guides may be obtained from International Baccalaureate of North America.
u81 §113.114. International Baccalaureate (IB) Geography Standard Level (SL) (Two Credits).
u82 (a) General requirements. Students shall be awarded two credits for successful completion of this course. This course may be used to meet required course requirements for state graduation.
u83 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for IB Geography SL are prescribed by the International Baccalaureate Organization. Subject guides may be obtained from International Baccalaureate of North America and in §113.43 of this title (relating to World Geography Studies (One Credit), Adopted 2018).
u86 §113.115. International Baccalaureate (IB) Geography Higher Level (HL) (Two Credits).
u87 (a) General requirements. Students shall be awarded two credits for successful completion of this course. One credit may be used to meet the course requirement in World Geography Studies for state graduation; the other credit may be used to meet only elective course requirements for state graduation.
u88 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for IB Geography HL are prescribed by the International Baccalaureate Organization. Subject guides may be obtained from International Baccalaureate of North America and in §113.43 of this title (relating to World Geography Studies (One Credit), Adopted 2018).
u91 §113.116. International Baccalaureate (IB) Psychology Standard Level (SL) ( Two Credits).
u92 (a) General requirements. Students shall be awarded two credits for successful completion of this course. This course may be used to meet only elective course requirements for state graduation.
u93 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for IB Psychology SL are prescribed by the International Baccalaureate Organization. Subject guides may be obtained from International Baccalaureate of North America.
u96 §113.117. International Baccalaureate (IB) Psychology Higher Level (HL) (Two Credits).
u97 (a) General requirements. Students shall be awarded two credits for successful completion of this course. This course may be used to meet only elective course requirements for state graduation.
u98 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for IB Psychology HL are prescribed by the International Baccalaureate Organization. Subject guides may be obtained from International Baccalaureate of North America.
=== page 5 === [running header: Other Social Studies Courses | §113.D. | Source: The provisions of this §113.117 adopted to be effective August | Statutory Authority: The provisions of this §113.118 issued under the  | Source: The provisions of this §113.118 adopted to be effective August]
u105 §113.118. International Baccalaureate (IB) Social and Cultural Anthropology Standard Level (SL) (Two Credits).
u106 (a) General Requirements. Students shall be awarded two credits for successful completion of this course. This course may be used to meet only elective course requirements for state graduation.
u107 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for IB Social and Cultural Anthropology SL are prescribed by the International Baccalaureate Organization. Subject guides may be obtained from the International Baccalaureate of North America.
u110 §113.119. International Baccalaureate (IB) Social and Cultural Anthropology Higher Level (HL) (Two Credits).
u111 (a) General Requirements. Students shall be awarded two credits for successful completion of this course. This course may be used to meet only elective course requirements for state graduation.
u112 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for IB Social and Cultural Anthropology HL are prescribed by the International Baccalaureate Organization. Subject guides may be obtained from the International Baccalaureate of North America.
u115 §113.120. International Baccalaureate (IB) World Religions Standard Level (SL) (Two Credits).
u116 (a) General Requirements. Students shall be awarded two credits for successful completion of this course. This course may be used to meet only elective course requirements for state graduation.
u117 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for IB World Religions SL are prescribed by the International Baccalaureate Organization. Subject guides may be obtained from the International Baccalaureate of North America.
u120 §113.121. International Baccalaureate (IB) Global Politics Standard Level (SL) (Two Credits).
u121 (a) General Requirements. Students shall be awarded two credits for successful completion of this course. This course may be used to meet only elective course requirements for state graduation.
u122 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for IB Global Politics SL are prescribed by the International Baccalaureate Organization. Subject guides may be obtained from the International Baccalaureate of North America.
u125 §113.122. International Baccalaureate (IB) Global Politics Higher Level (HL) (Two Credits).
u126 (a) General Requirements. Students shall be awarded two credits for successful completion of this course. This course may be used to meet only elective course requirements for state graduation.
=== page 6 === [running header: Other Social Studies Courses | §113.D. | Statutory Authority: The provisions of this §113.122 issued under the  | Source: The provisions of this §113.122 adopted to be effective August | Statutory Authority: The provisions of this §113.123 issued under the ]
u131 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for IB Global Politics HL are prescribed by the International Baccalaureate Organization. Subject guides may be obtained from the International Baccalaureate of North America.
u134 §113.123. Advanced Placement (AP) Microeconomics (One-Half Credit).
u135 (a) General requirements. This course may be used to meet required course requirements for state graduation. If Microeconomics is used to meet the required course requirement for state graduation, Macroeconomics may be used as a state-approved elective.
u136 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for Advanced Placement (AP) Microeconomics are prescribed in the College Board Publication Advanced Placement Course in Microeconomics published by The College Board.
u139 §113.124. Advanced Placement (AP) Macroeconomics (One-Half Credit).
u140 (a) General requirements. This course may be used to meet required course requirements for state graduation. If Macroeconomics is used to meet the required course requirement for state graduation, Microeconomics may be used as a state-approved elective.
u141 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for Advanced Placement (AP) Macroeconomics are prescribed in the College Board Publication Advanced Placement Course in Macroeconomics published by The College Board.
u144 §113.125. International Baccalaureate (IB) Economics Standard Level (SL) (Two Credits).
u145 (a) General requirements. One-half credit may be used to meet the course requirement in Economics for state graduation and one and one-half credits may be used to meet only elective course requirements for state graduation.
u146 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for IB Economics SL are prescribed by the International Baccalaureate Organization. Subject guides may be obtained from International Baccalaureate of North America.
u149 §113.126. International Baccalaureate (IB) Economics Higher Level (HL) (Two Credits).
u150 (a) General requirements. One-half credit may be used to meet the course requirement in Economics for state graduation and one and one-half credits may be used to meet only elective course requirements for state graduation.
u151 (b) Content requirements. Content requirements for IB Economics HL are prescribed by the International Baccalaureate Organization. Subject guides may be obtained from International Baccalaureate of North America.
=== page 7 === [running header: Other Social Studies Courses | §113.D. | Statutory Authority: The provisions of this §113.126 issued under the  | Source: The provisions of this §113.126 adopted to be effective August | August 2020 Update]
