=== page 1 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u3 Chapter 113. Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills for Social Studies
u4 Subchapter A. Elementary
u5 Statutory Authority: The provisions of this Subchapter A issued under the Texas Education Code, §7.102(c)(4) and §28.002, unless otherwise noted.
u6 §113.11. Social Studies, Kindergarten, Adopted 2022.
u7 (a) Implementation. The provisions of this section shall be implemented by school districts beginning with the 2024-2025 school year.
u8 (b) Introduction.
u9 (1) In Kindergarten, the study of the self, home, family, and classroom establishes the foundation for responsible citizenship in society. Students explore state and national heritage by examining the celebration of patriotic holidays and the contributions of individuals. The concept of chronology is introduced. Students apply geographic concepts of location and physical and human characteristics of place. Students identify basic human needs and ways people meet these needs. Students learn the purpose of rules and the role of authority figures in the home and school. Students learn customs, symbols, and celebrations that represent American beliefs and principles and contribute to our national identity. Students compare family customs and traditions and describe examples of technology in the home and school. Students acquire information from a variety of oral and visual sources. Students practice problem-solving, decision-making, and independent-thinking skills.
u10 (2) To support the teaching of the essential knowledge and skills, the use of a variety of rich material is encouraged. Motivating resources are available from museums, historical sites, presidential libraries, and local and state preservation societies.
u11 (3) The eight strands of the essential knowledge and skills for social studies are intended to be integrated for instructional purposes. Skills listed in the social studies skills strand in subsection (c) of this section should be incorporated into the teaching of all essential knowledge and skills for social studies. A greater depth of understanding of complex content material can be attained when integrated social studies content from the various disciplines and critical-thinking skills are taught together. Statements that contain the word "including" reference content that must be mastered, while those containing the phrase "such as" are intended as possible illustrative examples.
u12 (4) Students identify the role of the U.S. free enterprise system within the parameters of this course and understand that this system may also be referenced as capitalism or the free market system.
u13 (5) Throughout social studies in Kindergarten-Grade 12, students build a foundation in history; geography; economics; government; citizenship; culture; science, technology, and society; and social studies skills. The content, as appropriate for the grade level or course, enables students to understand the importance of patriotism, function in a free enterprise society, and appreciate the basic democratic values of our state and nation as referenced in the Texas Education Code (TEC), §28.002(h).
u14 (6) Students understand that a constitutional republic is a representative form of government whose representatives derive their authority from the consent of the governed, serve for an established tenure, and are sworn to uphold the constitution.
u15 (7) Students must demonstrate learning performance related to any federal and state mandates regarding classroom instruction. Although Kindergarten is not required to participate in Celebrate Freedom Week, according to the TEC, §29.907, primary grades lay the foundation for subsequent learning. As a result, Kindergarten Texas essential knowledge and skills include standards related to this patriotic observance.
u16 (8) Students discuss how and whether the actions of U.S. citizens and the local, state, and federal governments have achieved the ideals espoused in the founding documents.
=== page 2 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u21 (c) Knowledge and skills.
u22 (1) History. The student understands that holidays are celebrations of special events. The student is expected to:
u23 (A) identify national patriotic holidays such as Constitution Day, Presidents' Day, Veterans Day, and Independence Day; and
u24 (B) identify customs associated with national patriotic holidays such as parades and fireworks on Independence Day.
u25 (2) History. The student understands how historical figures helped shape the state and nation. The student is expected to identify contributions of historical figures, including Stephen F. Austin, George Washington, Christopher Columbus, and José Antonio Navarro, who helped to shape the state and nation.
u26 (3) Geography. The student understands the concept of location. The student is expected to:
u27 (A) use spatial terms, including over, under, near, far, left, and right, to describe relative location;
u28 (B) locate places on the school campus and describe their relative locations; and
u29 (C) identify and use geographic tools that aid in determining location, including maps and globes.
u30 (4) Geography. The student understands physical and human characteristics of place to better understand self, home, family, classroom, and the world around them. The student is expected to:
u31 (A) identify the physical characteristics of place such as landforms, bodies of water, Earth's resources, and weather; and
u32 (B) identify how geographic location influences human characteristics of place such as shelter, clothing, food, and activities.
u33 (5) Economics. The student understands the difference between human needs and wants and how they are met. The student is expected to:
u34 (A) identify basic human needs of food, clothing, and shelter;
u35 (B) explain the difference between needs and wants; and
u36 (C) explain how basic human needs and wants can be met.
u37 (6) Economics. The student understands the value of jobs. The student is expected to:
u38 (A) identify jobs in the home, school, and community; and
u39 (B) explain why people have jobs.
u40 (7) Government. The student understands the purpose of rules. The student is expected to:
u41 (A) identify purposes for having rules; and
u42 (B) identify rules that provide order, security, and safety in the home and school.
u43 (8) Government. The student understands the role of authority figures. The student is expected to:
u44 (A) identify authority figures in the home, school, and community; and
u45 (B) explain how authority figures enforce rules.
u46 (9) Citizenship. The student understands important symbols, customs, and responsibilities that represent American beliefs and principles and contribute to our national identity. The student is expected to:
u47 (A) identify the United States flag and the Texas state flag;
=== page 3 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u52 (B) recite the Pledge of Allegiance to the United States Flag and the Pledge to the Texas Flag; and
u53 (C) use voting as a method for group decision making.
u54 (10) Culture. The student understands similarities and differences among individuals. The student is expected to identify similarities and differences among individuals such as kinship and religion.
u55 (11) Culture. The student understands the importance of family traditions. The student is expected to:
u56 (A) describe and explain the importance of family traditions; and
u57 (B) compare traditions among families.
u58 (12) Science, technology, and society. The student understands ways technology is used in the home and school and how technology affects people's lives. The student is expected to:
u59 (A) identify examples of technology used in the home and school;
u60 (B) describe how technology helps accomplish specific tasks and meet people's needs; and
u61 (C) describe how his or her life might be different without modern technology.
u62 (13) Social studies skills. The student applies critical-thinking skills to organize and use information acquired from a variety of valid sources, including technology. The student is expected to:
u63 (A) identify and state facts based on relevant evidence;
u64 (B) identify different kinds of historical sources and artifacts and explain how they can be used to study the past;
u65 (C) gather information about a topic using a variety of valid oral and visual sources such as interviews, music, pictures, symbols, and artifacts with adult assistance; and
u66 (D) sequence and categorize information.
u67 (14) Social studies skills. The student communicates in oral and visual forms. The student is expected to:
u68 (A) place events in chronological order;
u69 (B) use social studies terminology related to time and chronology correctly, including before, after, next, first, last, yesterday, today, and tomorrow;
u70 (C) communicate information visually, orally, or in writing based on knowledge and experiences in social studies;
u71 (D) create and interpret visuals, including pictures and maps; and
u72 (E) apply and practice classroom rules and procedures for listening and responding respectfully.
u73 (15) Social studies skills. The student uses problem-solving and decision-making skills, working independently and with others. The student is expected to:
u74 (A) use democratic procedures to collaborate with others when making decisions on issues in the classroom, school, or community; and
u75 (B) use problem-solving and decision-making processes to identify a problem, gather information, list and consider options, consider advantages and disadvantages, choose and implement a solution, and evaluate the effectiveness of the solution.
u76 Source: The provisions of this §113.11 adopted to be effective August 23, 2010, 35 TexReg 7232; amended to be effective August 1, 2020, 44 TexReg 1988; amended to be effective August 1, 2024, 48 TexReg 842.
=== page 4 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u81 §113.12. Social Studies, Grade 1, Adopted 2022.
u82 (a) Implementation. The provisions of this section shall be implemented by school districts beginning with the 2024-2025 school year.
u83 (b) Introduction.
u84 (1) In Grade 1, students study their relationship to the classroom, school, and community to establish the foundation for responsible citizenship in society. Students develop concepts of time and chronology by distinguishing among past, present, and future events. Students identify anthems and mottoes of the United States and Texas. Students create simple maps to identify the location of places in the classroom, school, and community. Students explore the concepts of goods and services and the value of work. Students identify individuals who exhibit good citizenship. Students describe the importance of family customs and traditions and identify how technology has changed family life. Students sequence and categorize information. Students practice problem- solving, decision-making, and independent-thinking skills.
u85 (2) To support the teaching of the essential knowledge and skills, the use of a variety of rich material is encouraged. Motivating resources are available from museums, historical sites, presidential libraries, and local and state preservation societies.
u86 (3) The eight strands of the essential knowledge and skills for social studies are intended to be integrated for instructional purposes. Skills listed in the social studies skills strand in subsection (c) of this section should be incorporated into the teaching of all essential knowledge and skills for social studies. A greater depth of understanding of complex content material can be attained when integrated social studies content from the various disciplines and critical-thinking skills are taught together. Statements that contain the word "including" reference content that must be mastered, while those containing the phrase "such as" are intended as possible illustrative examples.
u87 (4) Students identify the role of the U.S. free enterprise system within the parameters of this course and understand that this system may also be referenced as capitalism or the free market system.
u88 (5) Throughout social studies in Kindergarten-Grade 12, students build a foundation in history; geography; economics; government; citizenship; culture; science, technology, and society; and social studies skills. The content, as appropriate for the grade level or course, enables students to understand the importance of patriotism, function in a free enterprise society, and appreciate the basic democratic values of our state and nation as referenced in the Texas Education Code (TEC), §28.002(h).
u89 (6) Students understand that a constitutional republic is a representative form of government whose representatives derive their authority from the consent of the governed, serve for an established tenure, and are sworn to uphold the constitution.
u90 (7) Students must demonstrate learning performance related to any federal and state mandates regarding classroom instruction. Although Grade 1 is not required to participate in Celebrate Freedom Week, according to the TEC, §29.907, primary grades lay the foundation for subsequent learning. As a result, Grade 1 Texas essential knowledge and skills include standards related to this patriotic observance.
u91 (8) Students discuss how and whether the actions of U.S. citizens and the local, state, and federal governments have achieved the ideals espoused in the founding documents.
u92 (c) Knowledge and skills.
u93 (1) History. The student understands the origins of customs, holidays, and celebrations. The student is expected to:
u94 (A) describe the origins of customs, holidays, and celebrations of the community, state, and nation such as Constitution Day, Independence Day, and Veterans Day; and
u95 (B) compare the observance of holidays and celebrations.
=== page 5 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u100 (2) History. The student understands how historical figures helped shape the state and nation. The student is expected to:
u101 (A) identify contributions of historical figures, including Sam Houston, George Washington, Abraham Lincoln, and Martin Luther King Jr., who have influenced the state and nation; and
u102 (B) compare the lives of historical figures who have influenced the state and nation.
u103 (3) Geography. The student understands the relative location of places. The student is expected to:
u104 (A) describe the location of self and objects relative to other locations in the classroom and school using spatial terms; and
u105 (B) locate places using the four cardinal directions.
u106 (4) Geography. The student understands the purpose of geographic tools, including maps and globes. The student is expected to:
u107 (A) create and use simple maps such as maps of the home, classroom, school, and community; and
u108 (B) locate and explore the community, Texas, and the United States on maps and globes.
u109 (5) Geography. The student understands physical and human characteristics of place to better understand their community and the world around them. The student is expected to:
u110 (A) identify and describe the physical characteristics of place such as landforms, bodies of water, Earth's resources, and weather; and
u111 (B) identify and describe how geographic location influences the human characteristics of place such as shelter, clothing, food, and activities.
u112 (6) Economics. The student understands how families meet basic human needs. The student is expected to:
u113 (A) describe ways that families meet basic human needs; and
u114 (B) describe similarities and differences in ways families meet basic human needs.
u115 (7) Economics. The student understands the concepts of goods and services. The student is expected to:
u116 (A) identify examples of goods and services in the home, school, and community;
u117 (B) identify ways people exchange goods and services; and
u118 (C) identify the role of markets in the exchange of goods and services.
u119 (8) Economics. The student understands the condition of not being able to have all the goods and services one wants. The student is expected to:
u120 (A) identify examples of people wanting more than they can have;
u121 (B) explain why wanting more than they can have requires that people make choices; and
u122 (C) identify examples of choices families make when buying goods and services.
u123 (9) Economics. The student understands the value of work. The student is expected to:
u124 (A) describe the tools of various jobs and the characteristics of a job well performed; and
u125 (B) describe how various jobs contribute to the production of goods and services.
u126 (10) Government. The student understands the purpose of rules and laws. The student is expected to:
u127 (A) explain the purpose for rules and laws in the home, school, and community; and
u128 (B) identify rules and laws that establish order, provide security, and manage conflict.
=== page 6 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u133 (11) Government. The student understands the role of authority figures and public officials. The student is expected to:
u134 (A) identify the responsibilities of authority figures in the home, school, and community; and
u135 (B) identify and describe the roles of public officials in the community, state, and nation.
u136 (12) Citizenship. The student understands characteristics of good citizenship as exemplified by historical figures and other individuals. The student is expected to:
u137 (A) identify characteristics of good citizenship, including truthfulness, justice, equality, respect for oneself and others, responsibility in daily life, and participation in government by educating oneself about the issues, respectfully holding public officials to their word, and voting; and
u138 (B) identify historical figures and other individuals who have exemplified good citizenship such as Benjamin Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt.
u139 (13) Citizenship. The student understands important symbols, customs, and celebrations that represent American beliefs and principles that contribute to our national identity. The student is expected to:
u140 (A) explain state and national patriotic symbols, including the United States and Texas flags, the Liberty Bell, the Statue of Liberty, and the Alamo;
u141 (B) recite the Pledge of Allegiance to the United States Flag and the Pledge to the Texas Flag;
u142 (C) identify anthems and mottoes of Texas and the United States;
u143 (D) explain and practice voting as a way of making choices and decisions; and
u144 (E) explain how patriotic customs and celebrations reflect American individualism and freedom.
u145 (14) Culture. The student understands the importance of family and community beliefs, language, and traditions. The student is expected to:
u146 (A) describe and explain the importance of beliefs, language, and traditions of families and communities; and
u147 (B) explain the way folktales and legends reflect beliefs, language, and traditions of communities.
u148 (15) Science, technology, and society. The student identifies individuals who created or invented new technology and understands how technology affects daily life, past and present. The student is expected to:
u149 (A) describe how technology has affected the ways families live;
u150 (B) describe how technology has affected communication, transportation, and recreation; and
u151 (C) identify the contributions of scientists and inventors such as Alexander Graham Bell, Thomas Edison, and Garrett Morgan.
u152 (16) Social studies skills. The student applies critical-thinking skills to organize and use information acquired from a variety of valid sources, including technology. The student is expected to:
u153 (A) identify and state facts based on relevant evidence;
u154 (B) identify different kinds of historical sources and artifacts and explain how they can be used to study the past;
u155 (C) gather information about a topic using a variety of valid oral and visual sources such as interviews, music, pictures, symbols, and artifacts with adult assistance; and
u156 (D) sequence and categorize information.
=== page 7 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u161 (17) Social studies skills. The student communicates in oral, visual, and written forms. The student is expected to:
u162 (A) use a simple timeline to distinguish among past, present, and future;
u163 (B) use a calendar to describe and measure time in days, weeks, months, and years;
u164 (C) communicate information visually, orally, or in writing based on knowledge and experiences in social studies;
u165 (D) create and interpret visual and written material;
u166 (E) use social studies terminology correctly; and
u167 (F) apply and practice classroom rules and procedures for listening and responding respectfully.
u168 (18) Social studies skills. The student uses problem-solving and decision-making skills, working independently and with others. The student is expected to:
u169 (A) use democratic procedures to collaborate with others when making decisions on issues in the classroom, school, or community; and
u170 (B) use problem-solving and decision-making processes to identify a problem, gather information, list and consider options, consider advantages and disadvantages, choose and implement a solution, and evaluate the effectiveness of the solution.
u171 Source: The provisions of this §113.12 adopted to be effective August 23, 2010, 35 TexReg 7232; amended to be effective August 1, 2020, 44 TexReg 1988; amended to be effective August 1, 2024, 48 TexReg 842.
u172 §113.13. Social Studies, Grade 2, Adopted 2022.
u173 (a) Implementation. The provisions of this section shall be implemented by school districts beginning with the 2024-2025 school year.
u174 (b) Introduction.
u175 (1) In Grade 2, students focus on a study of their local community by examining the impact of significant individuals and events on the history of the community as well as on the state and nation. Students begin to develop the concepts of time and chronology. The relationship between the physical environment and human activities is introduced as are the concepts of consumers and producers. Students identify functions of government as well as services provided by the local government. Students continue to acquire knowledge of customs, symbols, and celebrations that represent American beliefs and principles. Students identify the significance of works of art in the local community and explain how technological innovations have changed transportation and communication. Students communicate what they have learned in written, oral, and visual forms.
u176 (2) To support the teaching of the essential knowledge and skills, the use of a variety of rich material such as nonfiction texts, primary sources, biographies, folklore, poetry, songs, and artworks is encouraged. Motivating resources are available from museums, historical sites, presidential libraries, online tours, and local and state preservation societies.
u177 (3) The eight strands of the essential knowledge and skills for social studies are intended to be integrated for instructional purposes. Skills listed in the social studies skills strand in subsection (c) of this section should be incorporated into the teaching of all essential knowledge and skills for social studies. A greater depth of understanding of complex content material can be attained when integrated social studies content from the various disciplines and critical-thinking skills are taught together. Statements that contain the word "including" reference content that must be mastered, while those containing the phrase "such as" are intended as possible illustrative examples.
u178 (4) Students identify the role of the U.S. free enterprise system within the parameters of this course and understand that this system may also be referenced as capitalism or the free market system.
=== page 8 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u183 (5) Throughout social studies in Kindergarten-Grade 12, students build a foundation in history; geography; economics; government; citizenship; culture; science, technology, and society; and social studies skills. The content, as appropriate for the grade level or course, enables students to understand the importance of patriotism, function in a free enterprise society, and appreciate the basic democratic values of our state and nation as referenced in the Texas Education Code (TEC), §28.002(h).
u184 (6) Students understand that a constitutional republic is a representative form of government whose representatives derive their authority from the consent of the governed, serve for an established tenure, and are sworn to uphold the constitution.
u185 (7) Students must demonstrate learning performance related to any federal and state mandates regarding classroom instruction. Although Grade 2 is not required to participate in Celebrate Freedom Week, according to the TEC, §29.907, primary grades lay the foundation for subsequent learning. As a result, Grade 2 Texas essential knowledge and skills include standards related to this patriotic observance.
u186 (8) Students discuss how and whether the actions of U.S. citizens and the local, state, and federal governments have achieved the ideals espoused in the founding documents.
u187 (c) Knowledge and skills.
u188 (1) History. The student understands the historical significance of landmarks and celebrations in the community, state, and nation. The student is expected to:
u189 (A) explain the significance of various community, state, and national celebrations such as Veterans Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, and Thanksgiving; and
u190 (B) identify and explain the significance of various community, state, and national landmarks such as monuments and government buildings.
u191 (2) History. The student understands how historical figures helped shape the community, state, and nation. The student is expected to:
u192 (A) identify contributions of historical figures, including Thurgood Marshall, Irma Rangel, and Theodore Roosevelt, who have influenced the state and nation; and
u193 (B) describe how people and events have influenced local community history.
u194 (3) Geography. The student uses simple geographic tools, including maps and globes. The student is expected to:
u195 (A) identify and use information on maps and globes using basic map elements such as title, cardinal directions, and legend; and
u196 (B) create maps to show places and routes within the home, school, and community.
u197 (4) Geography. The student understands the location of places in their community, state, country, and the world. The student is expected to:
u198 (A) identify major landforms and bodies of water, including each of the seven continents and each of the oceans, on maps and globes; and
u199 (B) locate places, including the local community, Texas, the United States, the state capital, the U.S. capital, and the bordering countries of Canada and Mexico on maps and globes.
u200 (5) Geography. The student understands how humans use and modify the physical environment. The student is expected to:
u201 (A) identify ways in which people have modified the physical environment such as clearing land, building roads, using land for agriculture, and drilling for oil;
u202 (B) identify consequences of human modification of the physical environment; and
u203 (C) identify ways people can conserve and replenish Earth's resources.
=== page 9 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u208 (6) Economics. The student understands the value of work. The student is expected to:
u209 (A) explain how work provides income to purchase goods and services; and
u210 (B) explain the choices people can make about earning, spending, and saving money.
u211 (7) Economics. The student understands the roles of producers and consumers in the production of goods and services. The student is expected to:
u212 (A) distinguish between producing and consuming;
u213 (B) identify ways in which people are both producers and consumers; and
u214 (C) trace the development of a product from a natural resource to a finished product.
u215 (8) Government. The student understands the purpose of governments. The student is expected to:
u216 (A) identify functions of governments such as establishing order, providing security, and managing conflict; and
u217 (B) identify governmental services in the community such as police and fire protection, libraries, schools, and parks and explain their value to the community.
u218 (9) Government. The student understands the role of public officials. The student is expected to:
u219 (A) name current public officials, including mayor, governor, and president;
u220 (B) compare the roles of public officials, including mayor, governor, and president;
u221 (C) identify ways that public officials are selected, including election and appointment to office; and
u222 (D) identify how citizens participate in their own governance through staying informed of what public officials are doing, providing input to them, and volunteering to participate in government functions.
u223 (10) Citizenship. The student understands characteristics of good citizenship as exemplified by historical figures and other individuals. The student is expected to:
u224 (A) identify characteristics of good citizenship, including truthfulness, justice, equality, respect for oneself and others, responsibility in daily life, and participation in government by educating oneself about the issues, respectfully holding public officials to their word, and voting;
u225 (B) identify historical figures and other individuals who have exemplified good citizenship such as Paul Revere, Abigail Adams, World War II Women Airforce Service Pilots (WASPs), Navajo Code Talkers, and Sojourner Truth; and
u226 (C) identify ways to actively practice good citizenship, including involvement in community service.
u227 (11) Citizenship. The student understands important symbols, customs, and celebrations that represent American beliefs and principles that contribute to our national identity. The student is expected to:
u228 (A) recite the Pledge of Allegiance to the United States Flag and the Pledge to the Texas Flag;
u229 (B) sing, recite, or identify selected patriotic songs, including "The Star-Spangled Banner" and "America the Beautiful";
u230 (C) use voting as a method for group decision making;
u231 (D) identify symbols such as state and national birds and flowers and Uncle Sam; and
u232 (E) identify how selected symbols, customs, and celebrations reflect an American love of individualism, inventiveness, and freedom.
u233 (12) Culture. The student understands ethnic and/or cultural celebrations. The student is expected to:
=== page 10 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u238 (A) identify the significance of various ethnic and/or cultural celebrations; and
u239 (B) compare ethnic and/or cultural celebrations.
u240 (13) Science, technology, and society. The student understands how science and technology have affected life, past and present. The student is expected to:
u241 (A) describe how science and technology have affected communication, transportation, and recreation; and
u242 (B) explain how science and technology have affected the ways in which people meet basic needs.
u243 (14) Science, technology, and society. The student identifies individuals who exhibited individualism and inventiveness. The student is expected to identify individuals who have exhibited individualism and inventiveness such as Amelia Earhart and George Washington Carver.
u244 (15) Social studies skills. The student applies critical-thinking skills to organize and use information acquired from a variety of valid sources, including technology. The student is expected to:
u245 (A) identify and state facts based on relevant evidence;
u246 (B) identify different kinds of historical sources and artifacts and explain how they can be used to study the past;
u247 (C) gather information about a topic using a variety of valid oral and visual sources such as interviews, music, pictures, maps, and artifacts; and
u248 (D) interpret oral, visual, and print material by sequencing, categorizing, identifying the main idea, predicting, comparing, and contrasting.
u249 (16) Social studies skills. The student communicates in written, oral, and visual forms. The student is expected to:
u250 (A) describe the order of events by using designations of time periods such as historical and present times;
u251 (B) apply vocabulary related to chronology, including past, present, and future;
u252 (C) create and interpret timelines for events in the past and present;
u253 (D) use social studies terminology correctly;
u254 (E) communicate information visually, orally, or in writing based on knowledge and experiences in social studies;
u255 (F) create written and visual material such as stories, maps, and graphic organizers to express ideas; and
u256 (G) apply and practice classroom rules and procedures for listening and responding respectfully.
u257 (17) Social studies skills. The student uses problem-solving and decision-making skills, working independently and with others. The student is expected to:
u258 (A) use democratic procedures to collaborate with others when making decisions on issues in the classroom, school, or community; and
u259 (B) use problem-solving and decision-making processes to identify a problem, gather information, list and consider options, consider advantages and disadvantages, choose and implement a solution, and evaluate the effectiveness of the solution.
u260 Source: The provisions of this §113.13 adopted to be effective August 23, 2010, 35 TexReg 7232; amended to be effective August 1, 2020, 44 TexReg 1988; amended to be effective August 1, 2024, 48 TexReg 842.
=== page 11 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u265 §113.14. Social Studies, Grade 3, Adopted 2022.
u266 (a) Implementation. The provisions of this section shall be implemented by school districts beginning with the 2024-2025 school year.
u267 (b) Introduction.
u268 (1) In Grade 3, students learn how diverse individuals have changed their communities and world. Students study the effects inspiring heroes have had on communities, past and present. Students learn about the lives of heroic men and women who made important choices, overcame obstacles, sacrificed for the betterment of others, and embarked on journeys that resulted in new ideas, new inventions, new technologies, and new communities. Students expand their knowledge through the identification and study of people who made a difference, influenced public policy and decision making, and participated in resolving issues that are important to all people. Throughout Grade 3, students develop an understanding of the economic, cultural, and scientific contributions made by individuals.
u269 (2) To support the teaching of the essential knowledge and skills, the use of a variety of rich material such as biographies, founding documents, poetry, songs, and artworks is encouraged. Motivating resources are available from museums, historical sites, presidential libraries, and local and state preservation societies.
u270 (3) The eight strands of the essential knowledge and skills for social studies are intended to be integrated for instructional purposes. Skills listed in the social studies skills strand in subsection (c) of this section should be incorporated into the teaching of all essential knowledge and skills for social studies. A greater depth of understanding of complex content material can be attained when integrated social studies content from the various disciplines and critical-thinking skills are taught together. Statements that contain the word "including" reference content that must be mastered, while those containing the phrase "such as" are intended as possible illustrative examples.
u271 (4) Students identify the role of the U.S. free enterprise system within the parameters of this course and understand that this system may also be referenced as capitalism or the free market system.
u272 (5) Throughout social studies in Kindergarten-Grade 12, students build a foundation in history; geography; economics; government; citizenship; culture; science, technology, and society; and social studies skills. The content, as appropriate for the grade level or course, enables students to understand the importance of patriotism, function in a free enterprise society, and appreciate the basic democratic values of our state and nation as referenced in the Texas Education Code (TEC), §28.002(h).
u273 (6) Students understand that a constitutional republic is a representative form of government whose representatives derive their authority from the consent of the governed, serve for an established tenure, and are sworn to uphold the constitution.
u274 (7) State and federal laws mandate a variety of celebrations and observances, including Celebrate Freedom Week.
u275 (A) Each social studies class shall include, during Celebrate Freedom Week as provided under the TEC, §29.907, or during another full school week as determined by the board of trustees of a school district, appropriate instruction concerning the intent, meaning, and importance of the Declaration of Independence and the U.S. Constitution, including the Bill of Rights, in their historical contexts. The study of the Declaration of Independence must include the study of the relationship of the ideas expressed in that document to subsequent American history, including the relationship of its ideas to the rich diversity of our people as a nation of immigrants, the American Revolution, the formulation of the U.S. Constitution, and the abolitionist movement, which led to the Emancipation Proclamation and the women's suffrage movement.
u276 (B) Each school district shall require that, during Celebrate Freedom Week or other week of instruction prescribed under subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, students in Grades 3-12 study and recite the following text from the Declaration of Independence: "We hold these
=== page 12 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u281 Truths to be self-evident, that all Men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness--That to secure these Rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just Powers from the Consent of the Governed."
u282 (8) Students discuss how and whether the actions of U.S. citizens and the local, state, and federal governments have achieved the ideals espoused in the founding documents.
u283 (c) Knowledge and skills.
u284 (1) History. The student understands how individuals, events, and ideas have influenced the history of various communities. The student is expected to:
u285 (A) describe how individuals, events, and ideas have changed communities, past and present;
u286 (B) identify individuals, including Pierre-Charles L'Enfant, Benjamin Banneker, and Benjamin Franklin, who have helped to shape communities; and
u287 (C) describe how individuals, including Daniel Boone and the Founding Fathers have contributed to the expansion of existing communities or to the creation of new communities.
u288 (2) History. The student understands common characteristics of communities, past and present. The student is expected to:
u289 (A) identify reasons people have formed communities, including a need for security and laws, religious freedom, and material well-being; and
u290 (B) compare ways in which people in the local community and other communities meet their needs for government, education, communication, transportation, and recreation.
u291 (3) Geography. The student understands how humans adapt to and/or modify the physical environment. The student is expected to:
u292 (A) describe similarities and differences in the physical environment, including climate, landforms, natural resources, and natural hazards;
u293 (B) identify and compare how people in different communities adapt to or modify the physical environment in which they live such as deserts, mountains, wetlands, and plains; and
u294 (C) describe the effects of human processes such as building new homes, conservation, and pollution in shaping the landscape.
u295 (4) Geography. The student understands the concepts of location, distance, and direction on maps and globes. The student is expected to:
u296 (A) use cardinal and intermediate directions to locate places on maps and globes in relation to the local community;
u297 (B) use a scale to determine the distance between places on maps and globes; and
u298 (C) identify, create, and interpret maps of places that contain map elements, including a title, compass rose, legend, scale, and grid system.
u299 (5) Economics. The student understands the purposes of earning, spending, saving, and donating money. The student is expected to:
u300 (A) identify ways of earning, spending, saving, and donating money; and
u301 (B) create a simple budget that allocates money for spending and saving.
u302 (6) Economics. The student understands the concept of the free enterprise system and how businesses operate in the U.S. free enterprise system. The student is expected to:
u303 (A) explain how supply and demand affect the price of a good or service;
=== page 13 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u308 (B) define and identify examples of scarcity;
u309 (C) explain how the cost of production and selling price affect profits; and
u310 (D) identify individuals, past and present, such as Henry Ford and Sam Walton who have started new businesses.
u311 (7) Government. The student understands the basic structure and functions of various levels of government. The student is expected to:
u312 (A) describe the basic structure of government in the local community, state, and nation;
u313 (B) identify local, state, and national government officials and explain how they are chosen; and
u314 (C) identify services commonly provided by local, state, and national governments.
u315 (8) Government. The student understands important ideas in historical documents at various levels of government. The student is expected to:
u316 (A) identify the purposes of the Declaration of Independence and the U.S. Constitution, including the Bill of Rights; and
u317 (B) describe the concept of "consent of the governed. "
u318 (9) Citizenship. The student understands characteristics of good citizenship as exemplified by historical and contemporary figures and organizations. The student is expected to:
u319 (A) identify characteristics of good citizenship, including truthfulness, justice, equality, respect for oneself and others, responsibility in daily life, and participation in government by educating oneself about the issues, respectfully holding public officials to their word, and voting;
u320 (B) identify figures such as Helen Keller, Clara Barton, and Ruby Bridges who exemplify good citizenship;
u321 (C) identify and describe individual acts of civic responsibility, including obeying laws, serving and improving the community, serving on a jury, and voting;
u322 (D) identify examples of nonprofit and/or civic organizations such as the Red Cross and explain how they serve the common good; and
u323 (E) use voting as a method for group decision making.
u324 (10) Culture. The student understands ethnic and/or cultural celebrations of the local community and other communities. The student is expected to:
u325 (A) explain the significance of various ethnic and/or cultural celebrations in the local community and other communities; and
u326 (B) compare ethnic and/or cultural celebrations in the local community with other communities.
u327 (11) Culture. The student understands the role of heroes in shaping the culture of communities, the state, and the nation. The student is expected to:
u328 (A) identify and describe the heroic deeds of state and national heroes and military and first responders such as Hector P. Garcia, James A. Lovell, and the Four Chaplains; and
u329 (B) identify and describe the heroic deeds of individuals such as Harriet Tubman, Todd Beamer, and other contemporary heroes.
u330 (12) Culture. The student understands the importance of writers and artists to the cultural heritage of communities. The student is expected to identify how various writers and artists such as Kadir Nelson, Tomie dePaola, Carmen Lomas Garza, and Laura Ingalls Wilder and their stories, poems, statues, and paintings contribute to the cultural heritage of communities.
=== page 14 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u335 (13) Science, technology, and society. The student understands how individuals have created or invented new technology and affected life in various communities, past and present. The student is expected to:
u336 (A) identify individuals who have discovered scientific breakthroughs or created or invented new technology such as Jonas Salk, Cyrus McCormick, Bill Gates, Louis Pasteur, and others; and
u337 (B) describe the impact of scientific breakthroughs and new technology in computers, pasteurization, and medical vaccines on various communities.
u338 (14) Social studies skills. The student applies critical-thinking skills to organize and use information acquired from a variety of valid sources, including technology. The student is expected to:
u339 (A) gather information, including historical and current events and geographic data, about the community using a variety of resources;
u340 (B) differentiate and compare the information about a specific issue or event provided in primary and secondary sources;
u341 (C) interpret oral, visual, and print material by sequencing, categorizing, identifying the main idea, distinguishing between fact and opinion, identifying cause and effect, comparing, and contrasting;
u342 (D) interpret and create visuals, including graphs, charts, tables, timelines, illustrations, and maps;
u343 (E) identify the central claim in a primary or secondary source; and
u344 (F) develop and communicate a claim and supporting evidence visually, orally, or in writing related to a social studies topic.
u345 (15) Social studies skills. The student communicates in written, oral, and visual forms. The student is expected to:
u346 (A) use social studies terminology correctly;
u347 (B) create and interpret timelines;
u348 (C) apply the terms year, decade, and century to describe historical times;
u349 (D) express ideas orally based on knowledge and experiences;
u350 (E) create written and visual material such as stories, pictures, maps, and graphic organizers to express ideas; and
u351 (F) apply foundational language skills to engage in civil discourse about social studies topics, including those with multiple perspectives.
u352 (16) Social studies skills. The student uses problem-solving and decision-making skills, working independently and with others. The student is expected to:
u353 (A) use democratic procedures to simulate making decisions on school, local, or state issues; and
u354 (B) use problem-solving and decision-making processes to identify a problem, gather information, list and consider options, consider advantages and disadvantages, choose and implement a solution, and evaluate the effectiveness of the solution.
u355 Source: The provisions of this §113.14 adopted to be effective August 23, 2010, 35 TexReg 7232; amended to be effective August 1, 2020, 44 TexReg 1988; amended to be effective August 1, 2024, 48 TexReg 842.
u356 §113.15. Social Studies, Grade 4, Adopted 2022.
u357 (a) Implementation. The provisions of this section shall be implemented by school districts beginning with the 2024-2025 school year.
=== page 15 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u362 (b) Introduction.
u363 (1) In Grade 4, students examine the history of Texas from the early beginnings to the present within the context of influences of North America. Historical content focuses on Texas history, including the Texas Revolution, establishment of the Republic of Texas, and subsequent annexation to the United States. Students discuss important issues, events, and individuals of the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries. Students conduct a thorough study of regions in Texas and North America resulting from human activity and from physical features. The location, distribution, and patterns of economic activities and settlement in Texas further enhance the concept of regions. Students describe how early American Indians in Texas and North America met their basic economic needs. Students identify motivations for European exploration and colonization and reasons for the establishment of Spanish settlements and missions. Students explain how American Indians governed themselves and identify characteristics of Spanish colonial and Mexican governments in Texas. Students recite and explain the meaning of the Pledge to the Texas Flag. Students identify the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, and religious groups to Texas and describe the impact of science and technology on life in the state. Students use critical-thinking skills to identify cause-and-effect relationships, compare and contrast, and make generalizations and predictions.
u364 (2) To support the teaching of the essential knowledge and skills, the use of a variety of rich primary and secondary source material such as documents, biographies, novels, speeches, letters, poetry, songs, and artworks is encouraged. Where appropriate, local topics should be included. Motivating resources are available from museums, historical sites, presidential libraries, and local and state preservation societies.
u365 (3) The eight strands of the essential knowledge and skills for social studies are intended to be integrated for instructional purposes. Skills listed in the social studies skills strand in subsection (c) of this section should be incorporated into the teaching of all essential knowledge and skills for social studies. A greater depth of understanding of complex content material can be attained when integrated social studies content from the various disciplines and critical-thinking skills are taught together. Statements that contain the word "including" reference content that must be mastered, while those containing the phrase "such as" are intended as possible illustrative examples.
u366 (4) Students identify the role of the U.S. free enterprise system within the parameters of this course and understand that this system may also be referenced as capitalism or the free market system.
u367 (5) Throughout social studies in Kindergarten-Grade 12, students build a foundation in history; geography; economics; government; citizenship; culture; science, technology, and society; and social studies skills. The content, as appropriate for the grade level or course, enables students to understand the importance of patriotism, function in a free enterprise society, and appreciate the basic democratic values of our state and nation as referenced in the Texas Education Code (TEC), §28.002(h).
u368 (6) Students understand that a constitutional republic is a representative form of government whose representatives derive their authority from the consent of the governed, serve for an established tenure, and are sworn to uphold the constitution.
u369 (7) State and federal laws mandate a variety of celebrations and observances, including Celebrate Freedom Week.
u370 (A) Each social studies class shall include, during Celebrate Freedom Week as provided under the TEC, §29.907, or during another full school week as determined by the board of trustees of a school district, appropriate instruction concerning the intent, meaning, and importance of the Declaration of Independence and the U.S. Constitution, including the Bill of Rights, in their historical contexts. The study of the Declaration of Independence must include the study of the relationship of the ideas expressed in that document to subsequent American history, including the relationship of its ideas to the rich diversity of our people as a nation of immigrants, the American Revolution, the formulation of the U.S. Constitution, and the abolitionist movement, which led to the Emancipation Proclamation and the women's suffrage movement.
=== page 16 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u375 (B) Each school district shall require that, during Celebrate Freedom Week or other week of instruction prescribed under subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, students in Grades 3-12 study and recite the following text from the Declaration of Independence: "We hold these Truths to be self-evident, that all Men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness--That to secure these Rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just Powers from the Consent of the Governed."
u376 (8) Students discuss how and whether the actions of U.S. citizens and the local, state, and federal governments have achieved the ideals espoused in the founding documents.
u377 (c) Knowledge and skills.
u378 (1) History. The student understands the origins, similarities, and differences of American Indian groups in Texas before European exploration. The student is expected to:
u379 (A) explain the possible origins of American Indian groups in Texas;
u380 (B) identify and compare the ways of life of American Indian groups in Texas before European exploration such as the Lipan Apache, Karankawa, Caddo, and Jumano;
u381 (C) describe the cultural regions in which American Indians lived such as Gulf, Plains, Puebloan, and Southeastern; and
u382 (D) locate American Indian groups remaining in Texas such as the Ysleta Del Sur Pueblo, Alabama-Coushatta, and Kickapoo.
u383 (2) History. The student understands the causes and effects of European exploration and colonization of Texas. The student is expected to:
u384 (A) summarize motivations for European exploration and settlement of Texas, including economic opportunity, competition, and the desire for expansion;
u385 (B) identify the accomplishments and explain the impact of significant explorers, including Cabeza de Vaca; Francisco Coronado; and René Robert Cavelier, Sieur de la Salle, on the settlement of Texas;
u386 (C) explain when, where, and why the Spanish established settlements and Catholic missions in Texas as well as important individuals;
u387 (D) identify Texas' role in the Mexican War of Independence and the war's impact on the development of Texas; and
u388 (E) identify the accomplishments and explain the economic motivations and impact of significant empresarios, including Stephen F. Austin and Martín de León, on the settlement of Texas.
u389 (3) History. The student understands the importance of the Texas Revolution, the Republic of Texas, and the annexation of Texas to the United States. The student is expected to:
u390 (A) analyze the causes, major events, and effects of the Texas Revolution, including the Battle of the Alamo, the Texas Declaration of Independence, the Runaway Scrape, and the Battle of San Jacinto;
u391 (B) summarize the significant contributions of individuals such as William B. Travis, James Bowie, David Crockett, Juan N. Seguín, Plácido Benavides, José Francisco Ruiz, Antonio López de Santa Anna, Susanna Dickinson, and Enrique Esparza;
u392 (C) identify leaders important to the founding of Texas as a republic and state, including José Antonio Navarro, Sam Houston, Mirabeau Lamar, and Anson Jones;
u393 (D) describe the successes, problems, and organizations of the Republic of Texas such as the establishment of a constitution, economic struggles, relations with American Indians, and the Texas Rangers; and
=== page 17 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u398 (E) explain the events that led to the annexation of Texas to the United States and the impact of the U.S.-Mexican War.
u399 (4) History. The student understands the political, economic, and social changes in Texas during the last half of the 19th century. The student is expected to:
u400 (A) describe the impact of the Civil War and Reconstruction on Texas;
u401 (B) explain the growth, development, and impact of the cattle industry such as contributions made by Charles Goodnight, Richard King, and Lizzie Johnson;
u402 (C) explain the effects of the railroad industry on life in Texas, including changes to cities and major industries; and
u403 (D) explain the effects on American Indian life brought about by the Red River War, building of U.S. forts and railroads, and loss of buffalo.
u404 (5) History. The student understands important issues, events, and individuals of the 20th century in Texas. The student is expected to:
u405 (A) explain the impact of various events on life in Texas such as the Great Depression, the Dust Bowl, and World War II and notable individuals such as Audie Murphy, Cleto Rodríguez, and Bessie Coleman and other local individuals; and
u406 (B) explain the development and impact of the oil and gas industry on industrialization and urbanization in Texas, including Spindletop and important people such as Pattillo Higgins.
u407 (6) Geography. The student understands the concept of regions. The student is expected to:
u408 (A) identify, locate, and describe the physical regions of Texas (Mountains and Basins, Great Plains, North Central Plains, Coastal Plains), including their characteristics such as landforms, climate, vegetation, and economic activities; and
u409 (B) compare the physical regions of Texas (Mountains and Basins, Great Plains, North Central Plains, Coastal Plains).
u410 (7) Geography. The student understands the location and patterns of settlement and the geographic factors that influence where people live. The student is expected to:
u411 (A) explain the geographic factors such as landforms and climate that influence patterns of settlement and the distribution of population in Texas, past and present; and
u412 (B) identify and explain patterns of settlement such as the location of towns and cities in Texas at different time periods.
u413 (8) Geography. The student understands how people adapt to and modify their environment. The student is expected to:
u414 (A) describe ways people have adapted to and modified their environment in Texas, past and present, such as timber clearing, agricultural production, wetlands drainage, energy production, and construction of dams;
u415 (B) explain reasons why people have adapted to and modified their environment in Texas, past and present, such as the use of natural resources to meet basic needs, facilitate transportation, and enhance recreational activities; and
u416 (C) compare the positive and negative consequences of human modification of the environment in Texas, past and present.
u417 (9) Economics. The student understands the basic economic activities of early societies in Texas. The student is expected to:
u418 (A) explain the economic activities various early American Indian groups in Texas used to meet their needs and wants such as farming, trading, and hunting; and
=== page 18 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u423 (B) explain the economic activities early settlers to Texas used to meet their needs and wants.
u424 (10) Economics. The student understands the characteristics and benefits of the free enterprise system in Texas. The student is expected to:
u425 (A) describe how the free enterprise system works, including supply and demand;
u426 (B) identify examples of the benefits of the free enterprise system such as choice and opportunity; and
u427 (C) describe the development of the free enterprise system in Texas such as the growth of cash crops by early colonists and the railroad boom.
u428 (11) Economics. The student understands patterns of work and economic activities in Texas. The student is expected to:
u429 (A) identify how people in different regions of Texas earn their living, past and present;
u430 (B) explain how physical geographic factors such as climate and natural resources have influenced the location of economic activities in Texas;
u431 (C) identify the effects of exploration, immigration, migration, and limited resources on the economic development and growth of Texas; and
u432 (D) explain how developments in transportation and communication have influenced economic activities in Texas.
u433 (12) Government. The student understands how people organized governments in different ways during the early development of Texas. The student is expected to:
u434 (A) compare how various American Indian groups such as the Caddo and the Comanche governed themselves; and
u435 (B) compare characteristics of the Spanish colonial government and the early Mexican governments in Texas.
u436 (13) Government. The student understands important ideas in historical documents of Texas and the United States. The student is expected to:
u437 (A) identify the purposes and explain the importance of the Texas Declaration of Independence and the Texas Constitution;
u438 (B) identify and explain the basic functions of the three branches of government according to the Texas Constitution; and
u439 (C) identify the intent, meaning, and importance of the Declaration of Independence, the U.S. Constitution, and the Bill of Rights (Celebrate Freedom Week).
u440 (14) Citizenship. The student understands important customs, symbols, and celebrations of Texas. The student is expected to:
u441 (A) explain the meaning of various patriotic symbols and landmarks of Texas, including the six flags that flew over Texas, the Alamo, and the San Jacinto Monument;
u442 (B) sing or recite "Texas, Our Texas";
u443 (C) recite and explain the meaning of the Pledge to the Texas Flag; and
u444 (D) describe the origins and significance of state celebrations such as Texas Independence Day and Juneteenth.
u445 (15) Citizenship. The student understands the importance of active individual participation in the democratic process. The student is expected to:
u446 (A) identify important individuals who have participated voluntarily in civic affairs at state and local levels such as Adina de Zavala and Clara Driscoll;
=== page 19 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u451 (B) explain how individuals can participate voluntarily in civic affairs at state and local levels through activities such as respectfully holding public officials to their word, writing letters, and participating in historic preservation and service projects;
u452 (C) explain the duty of the individual in state and local elections such as being informed and voting;
u453 (D) identify the importance of historical figures and important individuals who modeled active participation in the democratic process such as Sam Houston, Barbara Jordan, Lorenzo de Zavala, Ann Richards, Henry B. González, Wallace Jefferson, and other local individuals;
u454 (E) explain how to contact elected and appointed leaders in state and local governments; and
u455 (F) use voting as a method for group decision making.
u456 (16) Citizenship. The student understands the importance of effective leadership in a constitutional republic. The student is expected to:
u457 (A) identify leaders in state, local, and national governments, including the governor, local members of the Texas Legislature, the local mayor, U.S. senators, local U.S. representatives, and Texans who have been president of the United States; and
u458 (B) identify leadership qualities of state and local leaders, past and present.
u459 (17) Culture. The student understands the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, and religious groups to Texas culture. The student is expected to:
u460 (A) identify customs, celebrations, and traditions of various cultural, regional, and local groups in Texas such as Cinco de Mayo, Oktoberfest, and Fiesta San Antonio; and
u461 (B) summarize the contributions of artists of various racial, ethnic, and religious groups in the development of Texas culture such as Lydia Mendoza, Chelo Silva, and Julius Lorenzo Cobb Bledsoe.
u462 (18) Science, technology, and society. The student understands the impact of science and technology on life in Texas. The student is expected to:
u463 (A) identify famous inventors and scientists such as Gail Borden, Joseph Glidden, Michael DeBakey, and Millie Hughes-Fulford and their contributions; and
u464 (B) describe how scientific discoveries and innovations such as in aerospace, agriculture, energy, and technology have benefited individuals, businesses, and society in Texas.
u465 (19) Social studies skills. The student applies critical-thinking skills to organize and use information acquired from a variety of valid sources, including technology. The student is expected to:
u466 (A) differentiate between, locate, and use valid primary and secondary sources such as technology; interviews; biographies; oral, print, and visual material; documents; and artifacts to acquire information about Texas;
u467 (B) differentiate and compare the information about a specific issue or event provided in primary and secondary sources;
u468 (C) analyze information by applying absolute and relative chronology through sequencing, categorizing, identifying cause-and-effect relationships, comparing, contrasting, finding the main idea, summarizing, making generalizations and predictions, and drawing inferences and conclusions;
u469 (D) organize and interpret information in outlines, reports, databases, and visuals, including graphs, charts, timelines, and maps;
u470 (E) identify different points of view about an issue, topic, historical event, or current event;
u471 (F) identify the central claim in a primary or secondary source; and
=== page 20 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u476 (G) develop and communicate a claim and supporting evidence visually, orally, or in writing related to a social studies topic.
u477 (20) Social studies skills. The student uses geographic tools to collect, analyze, and interpret data. The student is expected to:
u478 (A) apply mapping elements, including grid systems, legends, symbols, scales, and compass roses, to create and interpret maps; and
u479 (B) interpret geographic data, population distribution, and natural resources into a variety of formats such as graphs and maps.
u480 (21) Social studies skills. The student communicates in written, oral, and visual forms. The student is expected to:
u481 (A) use social studies terminology correctly;
u482 (B) incorporate main and supporting ideas in verbal and written communication;
u483 (C) express ideas orally based on research and experiences;
u484 (D) create written and visual material such as journal entries, reports, graphic organizers, outlines, and bibliographies; and
u485 (E) apply foundational language skills to engage in civil discourse about social studies topics, including those with multiple perspectives.
u486 (22) Social studies skills. The student uses problem-solving and decision-making skills, working independently and with others. The student is expected to:
u487 (A) use democratic procedures to simulate making decisions on school, local, or state issues; and
u488 (B) use problem-solving and decision-making processes to identify a problem, gather information, list and consider options, consider advantages and disadvantages, choose and implement a solution, and evaluate the effectiveness of the solution.
u489 Source: The provisions of this §113.15 adopted to be effective August 23, 2010, 35 TexReg 7232; amended to be effective August 1, 2020, 44 TexReg 1988; amended to be effective August 1, 2024, 48 TexReg 842.
u490 §113.16. Social Studies, Grade 5, Adopted 2022.
u491 (a) Implementation. The provisions of this section shall be implemented by school districts beginning with the 2024-2025 school year.
u492 (b) Introduction.
u493 (1) In Grade 5, students survey the history of the United States from 1565 to the present. Historical content includes the colonial period, the American Revolution, the establishment of the U.S. Constitution and American identity, westward expansion, the Civil War and Reconstruction, immigration and industrialization, and the 20th and 21st centuries. Students study a variety of regions in the United States that result from physical features and human activity and identify how people adapt to and modify the environment. Students explain the characteristics and benefits of the free enterprise system and describe economic activities in the United States. Students identify the roots of representative government in this nation as well as the important ideas in the Declaration of Independence and the U.S. Constitution. Students study the fundamental rights guaranteed in the Bill of Rights. Students examine the importance of effective leadership in a constitutional republic and identify important leaders in the national government. Students recite and explain the meaning of the Pledge of Allegiance to the United States Flag. Students describe the cultural impact of various racial, ethnic, and religious groups in the nation and identify the accomplishments of notable individuals in the fields of science and technology. Students explain symbols, traditions, and landmarks that represent American beliefs and principles. Students use
=== page 21 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u498 critical-thinking skills to sequence, categorize, and summarize information and to draw inferences and conclusions.
u499 (2) To support the teaching of the essential knowledge and skills, the use of a variety of rich primary and secondary source material such as documents, biographies, novels, speeches, letters, poetry, songs, and artworks is encouraged. Motivating resources are available from museums, historical sites, presidential libraries, and local and state preservation societies.
u500 (3) The eight strands of the essential knowledge and skills for social studies are intended to be integrated for instructional purposes. Skills listed in the social studies skills strand in subsection (c) of this section should be incorporated into the teaching of all essential knowledge and skills for social studies. A greater depth of understanding of complex content material can be attained when integrated social studies content from the various disciplines and critical-thinking skills are taught together. Statements that contain the word "including" reference content that must be mastered, while those containing the phrase "such as" are intended as possible illustrative examples.
u501 (4) Students identify the role of the U.S. free enterprise system within the parameters of this course and understand that this system may also be referenced as capitalism or the free market system.
u502 (5) Throughout social studies in Kindergarten-Grade 12, students build a foundation in history; geography; economics; government; citizenship; culture; science, technology, and society; and social studies skills. The content, as appropriate for the grade level or course, enables students to understand the importance of patriotism, function in a free enterprise society, and appreciate the basic democratic values of our state and nation as referenced in the Texas Education Code (TEC), §28.002(h).
u503 (6) Students understand that a constitutional republic is a representative form of government whose representatives derive their authority from the consent of the governed, serve for an established tenure, and are sworn to uphold the constitution.
u504 (7) State and federal laws mandate a variety of celebrations and observances, including Celebrate Freedom Week.
u505 (A) Each social studies class shall include, during Celebrate Freedom Week as provided under the TEC, §29.907, or during another full school week as determined by the board of trustees of a school district, appropriate instruction concerning the intent, meaning, and importance of the Declaration of Independence and the U.S. Constitution, including the Bill of Rights, in their historical contexts. The study of the Declaration of Independence must include the study of the relationship of the ideas expressed in that document to subsequent American history, including the relationship of its ideas to the rich diversity of our people as a nation of immigrants, the American Revolution, the formulation of the U.S. Constitution, and the abolitionist movement, which led to the Emancipation Proclamation and the women's suffrage movement.
u506 (B) Each school district shall require that, during Celebrate Freedom Week or other week of instruction prescribed under subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, students in Grades 3-12 study and recite the following text from the Declaration of Independence: "We hold these Truths to be self-evident, that all Men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness--That to secure these Rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just Powers from the Consent of the Governed."
u507 (8) Students discuss how and whether the actions of U.S. citizens and the local, state, and federal governments have achieved the ideals espoused in the founding documents.
u508 (c) Knowledge and skills.
u509 (1) History. The student understands the reasons for and the role of key people in the European colonization of North America beginning in 1565, the founding of St. Augustine. The student is expected to:
=== page 22 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u514 (A)
u515 explain when, where, and why groups of people explored, colonized, and settled in the United States, including the search for religious freedom and economic gain; and
u516 (B) describe the accomplishments of significant individuals who settled for religious freedom and economic gain during the colonial period, including William Bradford, Anne Hutchinson, William Penn, John Smith, and Roger Williams.
u517 (2) History. The student understands how conflict between the American colonies and Great Britain led to American independence and the formation of the United States. The student is expected to:
u518 (A) analyze the causes and effects of events prior to and during the American Revolution, including the taxation resulting from the French and Indian War and the colonist response to taxation such as the Boston Tea Party;
u519 identify the Founding Fathers and Patriot heroes, including John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, the Sons of Liberty, and George Washington, and their motivations and contributions during the revolutionary period; and
u520 (B)
u521 (C) summarize the results of the American Revolution, including the establishment of the United States.
u522 (3) History. The student understands the significant individuals who contributed to the creation of the U.S. Constitution and the government it established. The student is expected to identify the contributions of Founding Fathers James Madison and George Mason who helped create the U.S. Constitution.
u523 (4) History. The student understands political, economic, and social changes that occurred in the United States during the 19th century. The student is expected to:
u524 (A) describe the causes and effects of the War of 1812 such as impressment of sailors, territorial conflicts with Great Britain, and the increase in U.S. manufacturing;
u525 (B) identify and explain how changes resulting from the Industrial Revolution led to conflict among sections of the United States;
u526 (C) identify significant events and concepts associated with U.S. territorial expansion, including the Louisiana Purchase, the expedition of Lewis and Clark, and Manifest Destiny;
u527 (D) explain the central role of the expansion of slavery in causing sectionalism, disagreement over states' rights, and the Civil War;
u528 (E) explain the effects of the Civil War, including Reconstruction and the 13th, 14th, and 15th amendments to the U.S. Constitution; and
u529 (F) identify the challenges, opportunities, and contributions of people from various American Indian and immigrant groups such as the settlement of the frontier and building of the Transcontinental Railroad.
u530 (5) History. The student understands important issues, events, and individuals in the United States during the 20th and 21st centuries. The student is expected to:
u531 (A) explain the significance of issues and events of the 20th century such as industrialization, urbanization, the Great Depression, the world wars, the civil rights movement, and military actions;
u532 (B) analyze various issues and events of the 21st century such as the War on Terror and the 2008 presidential election; and
u533 (C) identify the accomplishments and contributions of individuals and groups such as Susan B. Anthony, Martin Luther King Jr., Rosa Parks, Cesar Chavez, Franklin D. Roosevelt, Ronald Reagan, the Tuskegee Airmen, and the 442nd Regimental Combat Team in the areas of civil rights, women's rights, military actions, and politics.
=== page 23 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u538 (6) Geography. The student understands places and regions in the United States. The student is expected to:
u539 (A) describe political and economic regions in the United States that result from patterns of human activity;
u540 (B) describe regions in the United States based on physical characteristics such as landform, climate, and vegetation;
u541 (C) locate on a map important political features such as the five largest cities by population in the United States and the 50 states; and
u542 (D) create a map of important physical features such as the Appalachian Mountains, Great Lakes, Mississippi River, Great Plains, and Rocky Mountains.
u543 (7) Geography. The student understands the location and patterns of settlement and the geographic factors that influence where people live. The student is expected to:
u544 (A) identify and describe the patterns of settlement such as rural, urban, and suburban;
u545 (B) explain the geographic factors that influence patterns of settlement and the distribution of population in the United States; and
u546 analyze the geographic factors that influence the location of the five largest urban areas in the United States and explain their distribution.
u547 (C)
u548 (8) Geography. The student understands how people adapt to and modify their environment. The student is expected to:
u549 describe how and why people have adapted to and modified their environment in the United States such as the use of human resources to meet basic needs; and
u550 (A)
u551 (B) analyze the positive and negative consequences of human modification of the environment in the United States.
u552 (9) Economics. The student understands the basic economic patterns of early societies in the United States. The student is expected to:
u553 (A) explain the economic patterns of early European colonies; and
u554 (B) identify major industries of colonial America such as shipbuilding and growing of cash crops.
u555 (10) Economics. The student understands the development, characteristics, and benefits of the free enterprise system in the United States. The student is expected to:
u556 identify the development of the free enterprise system in colonial America and the United States;
u557 (A)
u558 describe how the free enterprise system works in the United States; and
u559 (B)
u560 (C) give examples of the benefits of the free enterprise system in the United States.
u561 (11) Economics. The student understands the impact of supply and demand on consumers and producers in a free enterprise system. The student is expected to:
u562 (A) explain how supply and demand affects consumers in the United States; and
u563 (B) evaluate the effects of supply and demand on industry and agriculture, including the plantation system, in the United States.
u564 (12) Economics. The student understands patterns of work and economic activities in the United States. The student is expected to:
u565 (A)
u566 compare how people in different regions of the United States earn a living, past and present;
=== page 24 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u571 (B) identify and explain how geographic factors have influenced the location of economic activities in the United States;
u572 (C) analyze the effects of immigration and migration on the economic development and growth of the United States; and
u573 (D) describe the impact of mass production, specialization, and division of labor on the economic growth of the United States.
u574 (13) Government. The student understands the organization of governments in colonial America. The student is expected to:
u575 (A) compare the systems of government of early European colonists, including representative government and monarchy; and
u576 (B) identify examples of representative government in the American colonies, including the Mayflower Compact and the Virginia House of Burgesses.
u577 (14)
u578 Government. The student understands important ideas in the Declaration of Independence, the U.S. Constitution, and the Bill of Rights. The student is expected to:
u579 (A)
u580 explain the purposes, key elements, and the importance of the Declaration of Independence;
u581 explain the purposes of the U.S. Constitution as identified in the Preamble; and
u582 (B)
u583 (C) explain the reasons for the creation of the Bill of Rights and its importance.
u584 (15) Government. The student understands the framework of government created by the U.S. Constitution of 1787. The student is expected to:
u585 (A) identify and explain the basic functions of the three branches of government;
u586 (B) identify the reasons for and describe the system of checks and balances outlined in the U.S. Constitution; and
u587 (C) distinguish between national and state governments and compare their responsibilities in the U.S. federal system.
u588 (16) Citizenship. The student understands important symbols, customs, celebrations, and landmarks that represent American beliefs and principles that contribute to our national identity. The student is expected to:
u589 explain various patriotic symbols, including Uncle Sam; national celebrations such as Labor Day; and political symbols such as the donkey and elephant;
u590 (A)
u591 (B) sing or recite "The Star-Spangled Banner" and explain its history;
u592 (C) recite and explain the meaning of the Pledge of Allegiance to the United States Flag; and
u593 (D) explain the significance of important landmarks, including the White House, the Statue of Liberty, and Mount Rushmore.
u594 (17) Citizenship. The student understands the importance of individual participation in the democratic process at the local, state, and national levels. The student is expected to:
u595 (A)
u596 explain why individuals have a duty to participate in civic affairs at the local, state, and national levels;
u597 (B) explain how to contact elected and appointed leaders in local, state, and national governments; and
u598 (C) use voting as a method for group decision making.
=== page 25 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u603 (18) Citizenship. The student understands the importance of effective leadership in a constitutional republic. The student is expected to:
u604 (A)
u605 identify past and present leaders in the national government, including the president and various members of Congress, and their political parties; and
u606 (B)
u607 identify leadership qualities of national leaders, past and present.
u608 (19) Citizenship. The student understands the fundamental rights of American citizens guaranteed in the Bill of Rights. The student is expected to describe the fundamental rights guaranteed in the Bill of Rights, including freedom of religion, speech, and press; the right to assemble and petition the government; the right to keep and bear arms; the right to trial by jury; and the right to an attorney.
u609 (20) Culture. The student understands the relationship between the arts and the times during which they were created. The student is expected to:
u610 (A) identify significant examples of art, music, and literature from various periods in U.S. history such as the painting American Progress, "Yankee Doodle," and "Paul Revere's Ride"; and
u611 (B) explain how examples of art, music, and literature reflect the times during which they were created.
u612 (21) Culture. The student understands the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, and religious groups to the United States culture. The student is expected to:
u613 (A)
u614 describe customs and traditions of various racial, ethnic, and religious groups in the United States; and
u615 summarize the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, and religious groups to our national identity.
u616 (B)
u617 (22) Science, technology, and society. The student understands the impact of science and technology on society in the United States. The student is expected to:
u618 identify the accomplishments of notable individuals in the fields of science and technology such as Benjamin Franklin, Eli Whitney, John Deere, Thomas Edison, Alexander Graham Bell, George Washington Carver, the Wright Brothers, and Neil Armstrong;
u619 (A)
u620 (B)
u621 identify how scientific discoveries, technological innovations, and the rapid growth of technology industries have advanced the economic development of the United States, including the transcontinental railroad and the space program; and
u622 (C) explain how scientific discoveries and technological innovations in the fields of medicine, communication, and transportation have benefited individuals and society in the United States.
u623 (23) Social studies skills. The student applies critical-thinking skills to organize and use information acquired from a variety of valid sources, including technology. The student is expected to:
u624 (A) differentiate between, locate, and use valid primary and secondary sources such as technology; interviews; biographies; oral, print, and visual material; documents; and artifacts to acquire information about the United States;
u625 (B) identify and ask questions about the credibility of different kinds of primary and secondary sources;
u626 (C) analyze information by applying absolute and relative chronology through sequencing, categorizing, identifying cause-and-effect relationships, comparing, contrasting, finding the main idea, summarizing, making generalizations and predictions, and drawing inferences and conclusions;
=== page 26 === [running header: Elementary | §113.A. | August 2024 Update]
u631 (D) organize and interpret information in outlines, reports, databases, and visuals, including graphs, charts, timelines, and maps;
u632 (E) identify different points of view about an issue, topic, historical event, or current event;
u633 (F) identify the historical context of an event;
u634 (G) identify the central claim in a primary or secondary source; and
u635 (H) develop and communicate a claim and supporting evidence visually, orally, or in writing related to a social studies topic.
u636 (24) Social studies skills. The student uses geographic tools to collect, analyze, and interpret data. The student is expected to:
u637 (A) apply mapping elements, including grid systems, legends, symbols, scales, and compass roses, to create and interpret maps; and
u638 (B) interpret geographic data, population distribution, and natural resources into a variety of formats such as graphs and maps.
u639 (25) Social studies skills. The student communicates in written, oral, and visual forms. The student is expected to:
u640 (A) use social studies terminology correctly;
u641 (B) incorporate main and supporting ideas in verbal and written communication;
u642 (C) express ideas orally based on research and experiences;
u643 (D) create written and visual material such as journal entries, reports, graphic organizers, outlines, and bibliographies; and
u644 (E) apply foundational language skills to engage in civil discourse about social studies topics, including those with multiple perspectives.
u645 (26) Social studies skills. The student uses problem-solving and decision-making skills, working independently and with others. The student is expected to:
u646 (A) use democratic procedures to simulate making decisions on school, local, or state issues; and
u647 (B) use problem-solving and decision-making processes to identify a problem, gather information, list and consider options, consider advantages and disadvantages, choose and implement a solution, and evaluate the effectiveness of the solution.
u648 Source: The provisions of this §113.16 adopted to be effective August 23, 2010, 35 TexReg 7232; amended to be effective August 1, 2020, 44 TexReg 1988; amended to be effective August 1, 2024, 48 TexReg 842.
