=== page 1 ===
u1 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies
=== page 2 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2 For information regarding the Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies and other materials, contact:
u3 Alabama State Department of Education Instructional Services Section 3345 Gordon Persons Building Montgomery, Alabama
u4 P.O. Box 302101 Montgomery, AL 36130-2101 (334) 694-4768
u5 ©2024 Alabama State Department of Education Eric G. Mackey, State Superintendent of Education
u6 The Alabama State Board of Education and the Alabama State Department of Education do not discriminate on the basis of race, color, disability, sex, religion, national origin, or age in their programs, activities, or employment and provide equal access to the Boy Scouts and other designated youth groups. The following person is responsible for handling inquiries regarding the non-discrimination policies: Title IX Coordinator, Alabama State Department of Education, P.O. Box 302101, Montgomery, AL 36130-2101, telephone (334) 694-4717.
=== page 3 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u9 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies
u10 Eric G. Mackey State Superintendent of Education
=== page 4 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u13 (x=69) STATE SUPERINTENDENT OF
u14 (x=412) MEMBERS
u15 (x=82) EDUCATION’S MESSAGE
u16 (x=428) of the
u17 (x=321) ALABAMA STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
u18 (x=36) Dear Alabama Educator,
u19 (x=385) Governor Kay Ivey
u20 (x=36) To be truly prepared to participate in society as engaged, informed, and responsible citizens, students must have a rich education in civics, economics, geography, and history. This course of study incorporates essential knowledge in these disciplines while also communicating the story of liberty.
u21 (x=412) President
u22 (x=328) District
u23 (x=335) I. Jackie Zeigler
u24 (x=331) II. Tracie West
u25 (x=36) It is imperative that we teach our students to appreciate the fragility of liberty and to recognize the story of America as a journey toward freedom – a journey marked by struggle and sacrifice.
u26 (x=326) III. Stephanie Bell
u27 (x=328) IV. Yvette M. Richardson, EdD
u28 (x=333) V. Tonya S. Chestnut, EdD Vice President
u29 (x=36) Alabama teachers must focus on teaching social studies as a way of doing as well as knowing, emphasizing both disciplinary knowledge and disciplinary thinking in their instruction. The standards in the 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies are written to support innovative, creative, and impactful teaching that builds towards these goals.
u30 (x=327) VI. Marie Manning President Pro Tem
u31 (x=323) VII. Belinda McRae
u32 (x=318) VIII. Wayne Reynolds, EdD
u33 (x=36) Well-rounded instructional programs based on these standards and delivered to “Every Child, Every Chance, Every Day” will foster the development of well-informed citizens who appreciate and recognize their obligation to uphold America’s guiding values as they enter college, career, and civic life.
u34 (x=381) State Superintendent
u35 (x=393) Eric G. Mackey Secretary and Executive Officer
u36 Eric G. Mackey State Superintendent of Education
=== page 5 === [running header: Grade 1 | Grade 2 | Grade 3 | Grade 4 | Grade 5]
u39 (x=96) Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies
u40 (x=188) TABLE OF CONTENTS
u41 (x=36) TABLE OF CONTENTS PREFACE ACKNOWLEDGMENTS GENERAL INTRODUCTION
u43 (x=36) CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
u45 (x=36) GUIDING PRINCIPLES
u47 (x=36) DIRECTIONS FOR INTERPRETING STANDARDS
u49 (x=36) OVERVIEW
u51 (x=36) KINDERGARTEN-GRADE 2
u53 (x=54) Kindergarten
u59 (x=36) GRADES 3-5
u67 (x=36) GRADES 6-8
u75 (x=36) GRADES 9-12
u87 (x=36) Psychology
u89 (x=36) Sociology
u91 (x=36) Contemporary World Issues
u93 (x=36) Human Geography
u95 (x=36) Historical Studies
u97 (x=36) Holocaust Studies
u99 (x=36) Alabama Studies
=== page 6 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u103 (x=78) Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies
u104 (x=246) PREFACE
u105 The 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies provides the framework for Kindergarten - Grade 12 Social Studies programs in Alabama’s public schools. Content standards in this document are minimum and required (Code of Alabama, 1975, §16-35-4). They are fundamental and specific, but not exhaustive. When developing local curriculum, school systems may include additional content standards to reflect local needs and philosophies. Systems are encouraged to add implementation guidelines, resources, and activities based upon the content standards in the 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies.
u106 The 2024 Alabama Course of Study Committee and Task Force conducted extensive research during the development of the 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies, analyzing social studies standards and curricula from other states, previous versions of Alabama’s courses of study, and national standards. The Committee and Task Force also listened to and read comments from interested individuals and groups throughout the state, considered suggestions from independent reviewers, sought input from advisory councils, and thoroughly discussed each issue and standard among themselves. The Committee and Task Force reached consensus and developed what members believe to be the best social studies course of study for students in Alabama’s public schools.
=== page 7 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u109 (x=78) Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies
u110 (x=162) ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
u111 This document was developed by the 2024 Alabama State Social Studies Committee and Task Force, composed of Grades K-12 and college educators appointed by the Alabama State Board of Education and business and professional persons appointed by the Governor (Code of Alabama, 1975, §16-35-1). The Committee and Task Force began work in January of 2024 and submitted the document to the Alabama State Board of Education for adoption at its December 2024 meeting.
u112 Social Studies Course of Study
u113 Committee and Task Force
u114 Chair: Ron Snell, Superintendent, Geneva City Schools
u115 Connie Marie Boutwell, MAT, Teacher, Demopolis High School, Demopolis City Schools Martha Bouyer, DMin, Retired Educator, Jefferson County Schools Amber Broadhead, MEd, Teacher, Edgewood Elementary School, Homewood City Schools Abigail C. Brock, MEd, Teacher, Edgewood Elementary School, Homewood City Schools Tammy Lynn Brown, MATL, Central School, Madison County Schools Leslie Beery Clark, MEd, Teacher, Gwin Elementary School, Hoover City Schools Sara B. Demoiny, PhD, Associate Professor of Elementary Education, Auburn University Erin Margaret Diver, EdS, Instructional Coach Grades 4-6, Hibbett Elementary School, Florence City Schools Ronnie Allen Doughty, EdD, Education Specialist, ELA/Social Studies, Montgomery Public Schools Tracy E. Easterwood, MEd, Social Studies Curriculum Specialist, Jefferson County Schools Marcia Slay Farabee, EdS, NBCT, Director of Curriculum and Instruction, Gadsden City Schools Leah R. Faris, MA, NBCT, Teacher, Bob Jones High School, Madison City Schools Russell G. Hammack, EdD, Associate Professor, Jacksonville State University LaShaunda Michelle Harris, EdD, Education Specialist, Secondary Social Studies, Montgomery Public Schools Tisha Bryant Hayes, MEd, Teacher, Skyland Elementary School, Tuscaloosa City Schools Dieatra Howie, MEd, Social Studies Content Director, Grades 6-12, A+ College Ready Phyllis Lucille Jackson, MS, Teacher, Banks School, Pike County Schools Dorine Nicole James, MA, Teacher, Princeton Alternative Elementary School, Birmingham City Schools Ebone J. King, MEd, Teacher, Deshler High School, Tuscumbia City Schools Andrea L. Kohutek, EdD, Teacher, Alma Bryant High School, Mobile County Public Schools Amanda Leigh Mathis, EdD, Assistant Principal, Lauderdale County School District Reta McKannan, JD, Director, Alabama Center for Law and Civic Education, Huntsville Shelley LeAnne Minhinnette, MEd, Teacher, Tanner Williams Elementary School, Mobile County Schools Briana Patrias Morton, EdD, VP of Educational Services, Alabama Public Television Anna Lynn Mullican, MA, Cultural Resource Specialist, Oakville Indian Mounds Education Center, Lawrence
u116 County Schools
=== page 8 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u119 Adam Wayne NeSmith, EdD, Teacher, Susan Moore High School, Blount County Schools Adriana Carter-Peeples, BSEd, Museum Educator/Museum Services Coordinator, Florence Arts and
u120 Museums, Florence Indian Mound Museum Mitchell Brian Pinkston, MEd, Secondary Curriculum Supervisor, Baldwin County Public Schools Veronica Nichelle Pitts, MEd, Teacher, Selma High School, Selma City Schools Dan J. Puckett, PhD, Professor, Troy University Lisa Ramey, MS, Teacher, Smiths Station Junior High School, Lee County Schools Anne Katherine Roge, MEd, NBCT, Teacher, Auburn Junior High School, Auburn City Schools Amber Smalley, EdS, School Improvement Specialist, Mobile County Public Schools Courtney Leigh Spencer, PhD, Teacher, Prattville Junior High School, Autauga County Schools Richard Allen Stamper, MS, Teacher, Spain Park High School, Hoover City Schools Yvette Foster Stevens, MEd, Special Education Teacher, Olive J. Dodge Elementary School, Mobile County
u121 Public School System Harrow Strickland, MEd, NBCT, Teacher (Retired), Pick Elementary School, Auburn City Schools Dorothy Walker, MA, Site Director, Freedom Rides Museum, Alabama Historical Commission Kathryn M. Woddail, EdS, Teacher, Pike Road High School, Pike Road Schools Kristin A. Zimbelman, PhD, Associate Professor of Teacher Education, Huntingdon College
u122 Appreciation is expressed to the following content reviewers for their insightful comments and critiques:
u123 Jason Badoud, Teacher, Hayes K-8 School, Birmingham; Adrienne Bain, Teacher, McAdory High School, McCalla; Virginia Bakken, Teacher, Mountain Brook High School; Monica Balding, Teacher, Russellville Elementary School; David Beito, Professor Emeritus, University of Alabama; Ashley Benson, Teacher, Old Shell Road Magnet School, Mobile; Kristine Bordelon, Teacher, Castlen Elementary School, Grand Bay; Julia Brock, Assistant Professor, University of Alabama; Stacey Browning, Teacher, Homewood High School; Timothy Buckner, Associate Professor, Troy University; Michael Burger, Professor, Auburn University at Montgomery; Cory Callahan, Associate Professor, University of Alabama; Jennifer Cardwell, Teacher, Orange Beach Elementary School; Jeremiah Clabough, Associate Professor, University of Alabama at Birmingham; Matthew Clary, Lecturer, Auburn University; LeeDell Cook, Teacher, Fairview High School, Cullman; Kate Craig, Associate Professor, Auburn University; Val Crofts, Chief Education and Programs Officer, American Village; Ji Ji Davis, Associate Professor, University of Montevallo; Ni’Yai Davis, Teacher, Loachapoka High School; Matthew Downs, Dean, College of Arts and Sciences, University of Mobile; Susan DuBose, Retired Educator; Gilbert Dueñas, Professor, Auburn University at Montgomery; Robin Dunn, Education and Programming, Alabama Historical Commission; Michael Duran, Teacher, Demopolis High School; Kris Erskine, Assistant Professor, Athens State University; Paul Fitchett, Department Head, Curriculum and Teaching, Auburn University; Kari Frederickson, Professor, University of Alabama; Elijah Gaddis, Associate Professor, Auburn University; Kyle Gillespie, Teacher, Sparkman High School, Harvest; Caitlin Halperin, Teacher, Auburn High School; CharaieCelia Hamilton, Assistant Principal, McIntyre Comprehensive Academy and Montgomery County Youth Facility; Thomas Hammock, Teacher, Berry Middle School, Hoover; Elizabeth Hand, Instructor, Southern Union State Community College, Opelika; Rebecca Hardy, Teacher, Enterprise High School; Christopher Haveman, Associate Professor, University of West Alabama; Cynthia Higdon, Teacher, Springville High School; Marsha Holley, Education Outreach Director, University of Alabama Moundville Archaeological Park; Adam Hoose, Lecturer, Troy University; Dawn Howard, Teacher, Vincent High School; Sara Howard, Teacher, Decatur High School; Beth Hunter, Course
=== page 9 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u126 Instructor, University of Alabama at Birmingham; Molly Johnson, Associate Professor, University of Alabama in Huntsville; Soren Jordan, Associate Professor, Auburn University; Eva Kane, Assistant Professor, Troy University; Leah Kilfoyle, Teacher, Mountain Brook High School; Amanda Killough, Teacher, Redland Middle School; Kelly Kennington, Associate Professor, Auburn University; Jennifer Knutson, Assistant Director, University of South Alabama Archaeology Museum, Mobile; Allen Linken, Associate Professor, University of Alabama; Tondra Loder-Jackson, Professor, University of Alabama at Birmingham; Wesley Lybrand, Teacher, Columbia High School, Huntsville; Amy Maddox, Teacher, Vestavia Hills High School; Matt Malczycki, Associate Professor, Auburn University; Ashley Mann, President, Sandpiper Advisory Group; Chris Marsh, Teacher, Calera Middle School; D. Michael Martin, Teacher, Montevallo High School; Lisa Matherson, Retired Educator; Hayden McDaniel, Education Curator, Alabama Department of Archives and History; Gwendolyn Meister, Teacher, Vestavia Hills High School; Allen Mendenhall, Associate Dean, Sorrell College of Business, Troy University; David Meola, Associate Professor, University of South Alabama; David Messenger, Chair, Department of History, University of South Alabama; Cynthia McCarty, Professor, Jacksonville State University; James Mixson, Associate Professor, University of Alabama; Robert Mooneyhan, Teacher, Jefferson County International Baccalaureate School, Irondale; Andrew Morgan, Coordinator of Secondary Curriculum and Professional Development, Auburn City Schools; Patrick Morton, Teacher, Guntersville Middle School; Melissa Motes, Teacher, Barton Academy for Advanced World Studies, Mobile; Brian Murphy, Director, Florence Arts and Museums; Tatum Northington, Teacher, Autaugaville School; Martin Olliff, Professor, Troy University; Elizabeth Peifer, Associate Professor, Air Force Culture and Language Center; Kimberly Pierce, Teacher, Goodwyn Middle School, Montgomery; Ann Pickens, Teacher, Vestavia Hills High School Freshman Campus; Mindy Pierce, Teacher, Buckhorn High School, New Market; Casey Piola, Teacher, Homewood High School; Frank Price, Teacher, Pelham Park Middle School; Patricia Ray, Teacher, Johnson Abernathy Gaetz High School, Montgomery; LeeAnn Reynolds, Associate Professor, Samford University; Lesa Roberts, Curriculum Director, Whitesburg Christian Academy; Samuel Robison, Teacher, Smiths Station Junior High School; Harold Selesky, Associate Professor, University of Alabama; Danielle Seymour, Teacher, Baker High School, Mobile; Angela Shorter, Teacher, Cahaba Elementary School, Trussville; Dana Skelley, Assistant Professor, University of Alabama in Huntsville; Morgan Skelton, Teacher, Dora High School; Michael Slobodchikoff, Professor, Troy University; Idrissa Snider, Program Coordinator, Alabama Humanities Alliance; Matthew Spivey, Academic Supervisor, Social Studies, Mobile County Public School System; Jacob Stanley, Teacher, Duran Junior High School, Pell City; Jennifer Theeck, Curator of Education, History Museum of Mobile; Amy Thompson, Teacher, Bob Jones High School, Madison; Rebecca Thrash, AMSTI Life Sciences Specialist, Alabama State Department of Education; Jesús A. Tirado, Assistant Professor, Auburn University; Ruth Truss, Dean, College of Arts and Sciences, University of Montevallo; Scott Turner, Professor, University of Montevallo; Jason Wallace, Richard Stockham Jr. Chair of Western Intellectual History, Samford University; Betty Weeden, Coordinator of Elementary Curriculum and Professional Development, Auburn City Schools; Justin Weindorf, Teacher, Robertsdale High School; Erik Witherspoon, Teacher, Sumter Central High School, York; Nicholas Wood, Associate Professor, Spring Hill College; Nefertari Yancie, Assistant Professor, Kennesaw State University, Georgia; and Natasha Zaretsky, Professor, University of Alabama at Birmingham.
u127 Alabama State Department of Education personnel who managed the development process were:
u128 Eric G. Mackey, EdD, State Superintendent of Education Angela Martin, EdS, Deputy State Superintendent, Division of Instruction Melissa Shields, EdD, Assistant State Superintendent, Office of Student Learning Sean J. Stevens, MEd, Program Coordinator, Instructional Services
=== page 10 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u131 Cathy Jones, MS, Executive Secretary, State Courses of Study Committees, Instructional Services Catherine Wilbourne, MEd, Editor, Courses of Study Carol Sprayberry, MEd, NBCT, Consultant, Courses of Study Holly Summerlin, Administrative Support Assistant, Instructional Services
u132 Alabama State Department of Education specialists who worked with the Task Force in developing the document were:
u133 Blake Busbin, PhD, Education Specialist, Instructional Services Susanne Estes, MEd, Education Specialist, Instructional Services Andrea L. Beall, PhD, Education Specialist, Instructional Services Steve Blair, MEd, Education Administrator, Educational Technology Patrice P. Harvill, MEd, CALT, Education Administrator, Special Education Services Nikkesha Hooks, MEd, Education Administrator, Educational Technology Laci Holden, NBCT, Regional Literacy Specialist, Alabama Reading Initiative Emily Dean Murray, MEd, Regional Education Specialist, Instructional Services, English Learners Rebecca Floyd Pines, EdD, Education Specialist, Federal Programs Teri C. Shriver, MEd, Education Specialist, Special Education Services Charles V. Creel, Graphic Arts Specialist, Communications
=== page 11 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u136 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies
u137 GENERAL INTRODUCTION
u138 Social studies education in Alabama aims to prepare students to become knowledgeable, engaged, and responsible citizens. Social studies reflects the achievements, struggles, interactions, and endeavors that have characterized human society as it has changed over time and place to shape the world today. The disciplines of social studies include, but are not limited to:
u139 (x=59) ● Anthropology
u140 (x=194) ● Economics
u141 (x=329) ● History
u142 (x=464) ● Religion
u143 (x=59) ● Archaeology
u144 (x=194) ● Geography
u145 (x=329) ● Philosophy
u146 (x=464) ● Sociology
u147 (x=59) ● Civics
u148 (x=194) ● Government
u149 (x=329) ● Psychology
u150 These disciplines provide insights into the development of civic and social institutions, including culture, family, and community. Together, they foster inquiry, connection, and understanding about the world across time and space.
u151 The analytical study of yesterday and today contributes to developing informed, productive, and responsible citizens. Social studies education prepares Alabama students to apply disciplinary thinking practices and content knowledge to uphold and enhance the constitutional republic to which they belong.
u152 The 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies defines what Alabama students should know and be able to accomplish after each grade level or course so that upon graduation from high school they can be citizens who are able to fulfill the responsibilities of citizenship. These are citizens committed to:
u153 ● Discovering the historical and contemporary world in which they live, from local through international levels ● Reflecting on the achievements and challenges of the past ● Understanding the political, geographic, and economic systems that surround them ● Championing and exercising their rights and responsibilities as citizens ● Examining and resolving the issues of today and tomorrow ● Upholding the principles and values of their constitutional republic
u154 The Alabama Course of Study Committee and Task Force consulted multiple reports and perused other states’ standards, closely examining courses of study from states recognized as having high-performance standards. The authors sought to emphasize clarity and meaningful content knowledge in order to create high-quality social studies standards and construct a course of study best suited for Alabama.
u155 The 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies strives to deliver a balance of academic knowledge and skills development that guides students’ growth. This balance is achieved by grounding individual courses in social studies’ disciplinary knowledge and concepts coupled with the skills framework preceding each grade’s content standards. The skills framework emphasizes disciplinary skills, such as historical thinking and inquiry learning, including the evaluation of evidence. This framework derives much of its content and structure from the social studies courses of study of more than thirty other states and the Department of Defense which have embraced disciplinary practices and inquiry thinking. This emphasis on disciplinary skills and inquiry learning provides a means to elevate student critical thinking and establish connections among concepts as well as among disciplines.
=== page 12 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u158 Beyond the work completed by other states and organizations, the development of this document was greatly influenced by input from Alabamians from different regions, vocations, racial and ethnic groups, political orientations, and religious affiliations. The Committee and Task Force sought to engage many stakeholders to ensure that all Alabamians had a voice in this process. The Alabama State Department of Education made extensive efforts to reach out to stakeholders, seeking and receiving public comments on several occasions. All submitted input was carefully considered by authors of the 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies. The Committee and Task Force members are grateful to the individuals and organizations that took the time to submit their thoughts, inquiries, and suggestions.
u159 Effective implementation of this course of study requires local education agencies to research and adopt curriculum that will address the minimum required content set forth in this document. Local systems may include additional content, but no standards may be omitted. Systems should also adopt implementation guides, resources, and activities which not only fulfill the requirements of the standards but also provide opportunities to go beyond them.
u160 Professional learning is required to ensure that teachers become familiar with the standards, dimensions, structure, and organization of the 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies. Familiarity with the document will aid in the selection of curricular materials and with planning for effective instruction.
u161 By embracing these commitments, Alabama educators can more effectively prepare their students to be successful in college, career, and civic life as engaged citizens, fulfilling the purpose embodied in the first phrase of the Constitution, “We the People.”
=== page 13 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u164 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies
u165 CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
=== page 14 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u168 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies
u169 CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
u170 The conceptual framework on the preceding page is a graphic representation of the goals and structure of the 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies. The course of study is designed to present standards and progressions which will guide students toward becoming knowledgeable, civically engaged citizens. Such citizens have a foundation of social studies knowledge across many disciplines, a curiosity about the world around them, a structured approach to critical thinking, the ability to communicate their thoughts and beliefs, and a commitment to promoting the common good.
u171 The framework illustrates the relationship among these aspects of a social studies education by highlighting the central dimensions of their development within the course of study: the four key disciplines, the contexts in which these disciplines are studied, and the uniqueness of this course of study to Alabama.
u172 Four key disciplines are purposefully highlighted throughout the course of study: civics, economics, geography, and history. These disciplines help frame the imagery of the conceptual framework.
u173 The imagery above the circle illustrates the overlapping domains addressed by the course of study. The Alabama flag and the U.S. flag flanking the globe reflect the document’s emphasis on learning about Alabama, the United States of America, and the world. Each of these contexts is emphasized in the course of study by a three-year sequence of courses.
u174 At the center of the framework is the central image from the Great Seal of Alabama, indicating that the 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies is unique to the state – created by and for Alabamians. This course of study was written by educators as well as business and civic leaders from throughout the state to serve Alabama teachers and Alabama students. Its creation and content were influenced by the voices of many Alabamians and Alabama organizations. The inclusion of this image recognizes the united effort which has produced a course of study to shape the future citizenry of the state.
=== page 15 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u177 (x=96) Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies
u178 (x=176) GUIDING PRINCIPLES
u179 The 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies defines the minimum content of social studies instruction from Kindergarten through Grade 12 in terms of what students should know and be able to do at the end of each course or grade. Educators and leaders at school and district levels must engage with the standards and utilize them systematically to create a rich social studies education program that meets the needs of their students.
u180 Certain fundamental understandings are integral to educators’ comprehension and application of the course of study. The committee and task force present the guiding principles below to elaborate upon these expectations under which local education agencies should work as they select and write the curriculum and other materials they will use to implement the course of study. The statements below express what the authors consider to be foundational to social studies instruction as embodied in the 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies.
u181 Citizenship requires critical thinking.
u182 Engaged and responsible citizenship requires critical thinking about issues facing the public, policies established by governments, and solutions proposed by policymakers. To prepare students for their roles as citizens, social studies education should repeatedly engage students in higher-order thinking.
u183 Citizenship requires processing information in deep, insightful ways. This includes applying, analyzing, synthesizing, and evaluating content. While memorization and recall are important means of acquiring basic content knowledge, higher-order thinking moves students toward the application of content knowledge and the production of new knowledge.
u184 Students must formulate and consider compelling questions.
u185 Inquiry fuels the innate curiosity of citizens who frequently reflect on why society is the way it is at a specific time and place. The consideration of compelling questions in a social studies classroom reflects the issues and dilemmas that citizens encounter as they weigh public policy issues. The use of inquiry, with both teachers and students asking compelling questions, should guide social studies education in all grade levels. Constructing an answer to a compelling question necessitates higher-order thinking as inquiry brings together skills and content in a unique response.
u186 Social studies education connects content learning to the present day.
u187 Informed citizens engage in critical thinking when they apply knowledge from social studies disciplines to reflect on compelling questions and issues facing them today. Whether considering how the Founders may have approached a complex, twenty-first century constitutional question, or reflecting on how geography may shape a modern-day conflict, content knowledge introduced in social studies classes can help students understand the world surrounding them. The relevance of social studies education is enhanced through the development of connections between disciplinary content and issues of today.
u188 Social studies education should foster disciplinary and media literacy.
u189 Social studies education fosters the growth of general and discipline-specific literacy. In striving to develop an informed response to an inquiry, students and citizens turn to a wide array of sources to identify relevant
=== page 16 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u192 evidence. This begins as early as Kindergarten through engaging students with children’s literature that explores social studies themes. As students read both primary and secondary sources, they develop skills including analyzing the source, corroborating accounts, identifying main ideas, and questioning an author's claims. Constructing a response to an inquiry frequently requires interpreting evidence and information from multiple sources.
u193 Additionally, citizens must be prepared to question and analyze the information presented through sources beyond traditional written text. In the age of the Internet, social media, and artificial intelligence, the concept of literacy has expanded to include media. Media literacy skills help students to become engaged citizens who thoughtfully analyze the messages presented to them from televised campaign commercials to online product advertisements. Becoming a thoughtful consumer necessitates learning how to consume social media information carefully and use digital communication responsibly to ensure that they remain informed and thoughtful citizens in an increasingly complex media landscape.
u194 Today’s social studies classroom serves as a place in which these skills can be developed, practiced, and refined to prepare students to be literate and responsible citizens.
u195 Primary sources are essential for social studies disciplines.
u196 Primary sources aid in the development of contextualization and historical empathy, thus connecting students to the past and to other places and perspectives. Ranging in variety from physical objects to written documents, these original sources from history provide direct evidence of the past for students to analyze. The incorporation of primary sources is one avenue for literacy development in social studies education. Students apply discipline-specific literacy skills to the analysis of these sources as a means of generating understanding, going beyond textbook summations, and intensifying their engagement. Procuring and analyzing primary sources introduces students to the practices utilized by experts in their fields of study.
u197 Discovering and exploring multiple perspectives creates well-informed citizens.
u198 E pluribus unum – “out of many, one” – long served as a motto of the United States. In preparation for living in a diverse, democratic society, students must be able to consider differing viewpoints on issues and experiences. A meaningful social studies education explores the range of human experiences in one’s community, country, and the world at large. By exploring other communities, students learn to value the commonalities shared across many groups of people while also respecting the differences among them. Utilizing primary sources from many voices brings students into contact with multiple perspectives, which serve as springboards for deliberation and discussion in the classroom.
u199 Citizenship requires research and the construction of informed positions.
u200 Citizens corroborate evidence obtained from multiple sources to build an informed understanding or position on a compelling question. Students should engage in similar exercises inside their social studies classroom through the development of research skills and completion of research. This should go beyond the study of the written word to include analysis of data in charts, graphs, illustrations, infographics, and maps. The presentation of research findings offers opportunities to develop digital skills, like the building of a multimedia presentation, and sharpening one’s public speaking ability. Both skills are essential for citizens in the twenty-first century.
=== page 17 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u203 Writing is an indispensable civic tool.
u204 Writing is a critical tool for citizens to communicate their beliefs, concerns, and positions regarding the issues facing society. The classroom serves as a laboratory for this civic development, in which students can hone their communication skills and develop a voice of their own.
u205 From short responses to lengthy essays, from creative writing to formal compositions, students should be offered frequent opportunities to express themselves through writing. Classroom instruction should include learning to write, writing to learn, and writing to be creative. Because citizens are expected to construct informed positions, writing in the social studies classroom should be supported by evidence, responsive to multiple formats and purposes, and reflective of students’ understanding of content.
=== page 18 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u208 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies DIRECTIONS FOR INTERPRETING STANDARDS
u209 The illustrations below are guides for interpreting the Grades K-12 minimum required content outlining what students should know and be able to do at the end of a grade or course.
u210 Grade band overviews with icon and color coding guides can be found on page 10 for Kindergarten-Grade 2, page 22 for Grades 3-5, page 44 for Grades 6-8, and page 71 for Grades 9-12.
u211 For standards in high school elective courses that can be offered as either a half- or one-credit course, one may find an * next to a standard. An asterisk indicates a standard that must be taught in the half-credit version of the course while all standards are required in the one-credit version of the course.
=== page 19 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u214 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies
u215 OVERVIEW
u216 Courses in the 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies are organized into four different grade bands: Kindergarten to Grade 2, Grades 3-5, Grades 6-8, and Grades 9-12 followed by high school elective courses. Each grade band has an overview page that previews the courses within it.
u217 Each course for Kindergarten through Grade 2 incorporates all four key disciplines – civics, economics, geography, and history. Each required course in Grades 3-12 focuses on one specific discipline while incorporating and connecting to the remaining three disciplines in an interdisciplinary approach. Color coding and icons identify content standards that build connections between the key discipline of the course and other disciplines. Standards that contain Alabama-related content are marked with an Alabama icon. Because K-2 courses incorporate all four disciplines, they do not have the discipline icons and color coding found in later courses.
u218 Skills standards organized as social studies practices precede the content standards in each course. These six skills standards are not designed to be taught independently; they are to be integrated into the teaching of the content standards. Two of the social studies practices, “Evaluating Evidence” and “Communicating Conclusions,” are included in every course from Kindergarten through Grade 12. Grades 3 through 12 also address the other four practices, which are built around the disciplinary themes of the course of study: “Civic Thinking,” “Economic Thinking,” “Geographic Thinking,” and “Historical Thinking.” These skills standards increase in rigor and complexity from one grade band to the next.
u219 Content Standards contain the minimum required content and define what students should know or be able to do at the conclusion of a grade or course. Some have sub-standards, indicated with a, b, c..., which are extensions of the content standards and are also required. When “including” appears in standards, it should be construed as “including but not limited to.” The items listed after “including” must be taught; other items not listed may also be included in instruction.
u220 Some standards are followed by italicized examples that represent options that might prove useful in instruction of the standard. Examples are not intended to be exhaustive lists, and the suggestions listed are not required to be taught, but are encouraged as a means of ensuring meaningful instruction. Examples are provided as a means of guiding teachers as they make instructional decisions.
u221 Standards are thematically grouped into topics. For example, standards in history-based courses are organized by historical periods or eras. Topics help teachers identify standards that are similar in subject matter. Topics should not be interpreted as required instructional units, although a teacher may choose to utilize them as such.
u222 Course of study standards represent the minimum required content and are not intended to be the course curriculum. LEAs and local schools should use these standards to create a curriculum that utilizes available resources to meet the specific needs and interests of the local community. The Committee and Task Force have composed Guiding Principles (page 5) to offer suggestions regarding the creation of this curriculum.
=== page 20 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u225 (x=465) Kindergarten - Grade 2
u226 (x=531) Overview
u227 KINDERGARTEN-GRADE 2
u228 OVERVIEW
u229 The K-2 grade band introduces the four major social studies disciplines: civics; economics; geography; and history. Through a thematic approach to each grade’s standards, students begin to develop an appreciation for their community, state, and nation while broadening their perspectives regarding the lives of others. Kindergarten content addresses living and working together in family and community. Grade 1 content focuses on living and working together in community and in state. Grade 2 content expands on the theme to focus on state and nation. Throughout the grade band, students are challenged to develop a sense of their place in the world, including ways to excel both as private individuals and as public citizens.
u230 Within each course, connections are made between the key disciplines of the course and the state of Alabama. These standards are indicated by an icon, as seen below:
u231 ALABAMA CONNECTION: The map icon indicates a standard that focuses on Alabama content.
u232 Standards in each course are organized into topics related to the four key discipline areas of the 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies.
u233 Each course’s standards are preceded by a skills framework. For the K-2 grade band, this framework includes a set of skills organized by two social studies practices: “Evaluating Evidence” and “Communicating Conclusions.”
=== page 21 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u236 Kindergarten
u237 (x=112) Living and Working Together in Family and Community
u238 (x=259) Kindergarten
u239 Living and Working Together in Family and Community introduces Kindergarten students to the world beyond family and home. As kindergartners become acquainted with new classmates and their own responsibilities as students, they develop an awareness of the similarities and differences among individuals in the classroom, the school, and the local community. Interacting with a variety of sources, including maps, stories, and other primary sources, helps Kindergarten students gain a sense of purpose regarding their role in the community and the role of civics, economics, geography, and history in shaping their world.
u240 Course Topics: 1. Civics 2. Economics 3. Geography 4. History
u241 LOOKING AHEAD: Kindergarten marks the first formal year of social studies education. Students receive a basic introduction to key social studies concepts as they study family, school, and community, which will prepare them for future grade levels. First grade expands this introduction with a wider focus on community and state. Second grade completes this introduction to key social studies concepts as students learn more about Alabama and expand their focus to the United States.
u242 SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u243 The social studies practices listed below develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom. These practices help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in future courses as well as in college, career, and civic life.
u244 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
u245 [T1 R1 C2] ● Identify and use maps, globes, and satellite and digital images. ● Identify the point of view shared in a story. ● Utilize primary sources to help understand sequence of events.
=== page 22 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u248 Kindergarten
u249 [T1 R1 C2] ● Construct explanations using correct sequence and relevant information. ● Restate the order of events as described in a story. ● Ask and answer questions about differences of opinion.
u250 (x=80) LIVING AND WORKING TOGETHER IN FAMILY AND COMMUNITY
u251 (x=227) CONTENT STANDARDS
u252 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8.
u253 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u254 CIVICS
u256 Describe rights and responsibilities of citizens and individuals within the home, school, and community.
u257 1a Differentiate between rights and responsibilities of citizens and individuals.
u258 1b Explain how rules meet needs and provide order, security, and safety in the home, school, and community.
u259 (x=41) 2 Describe roles of community helpers and leaders.
u260 (x=109) Examples: custodians, fire and rescue workers, local business owners, police officers, principals, teachers
u261 (x=41) 3 Identify and explain symbols, customs, influential individuals, and celebrations associated with the home, school, community, state, and nation.
u262 (x=109) Examples: symbols - Alabama and United States flags; individuals - mayor, governor, president; celebrations - Independence Day, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, Thanksgiving, Veterans Day
u263 3a Describe the purpose of the national anthem (“The Star-Spangled Banner”) and Pledge of Allegiance.
u264 ECONOMICS
u265 4 Explain the process of earning, saving, and spending money.
u266 5 Describe the concept of exchange and how money is used to purchase goods and services.
u267 5a Differentiate between coin, paper, and digital currency in respect to value.
=== page 23 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u270 Kindergarten
u271 5b Differentiate between goods and services.
u273 Differentiate between needs and wants.
u274 GEOGRAPHY
u276 Explain the purpose and use of maps.
u277 (x=109) Examples: to follow directions, to locate places, showing sizes and shapes of places
u279 Identify landforms and bodies of water on maps, globes, and satellite and digital images.
u281 Give and follow directions, using terminology that indicates position and direction.
u282 (x=109) Examples: locating objects and places to the right or left, up and down, in or out, above or below
u283 HISTORY
u284 10 Sequence events using schedules, calendars, and timelines.
u285 10a Differentiate among broad categories of time, including long ago, yesterday, today, and tomorrow.
u286 (x=41) 11 Identify a primary source.
u287 (x=109) Examples: art, artifacts, diaries, letters, maps, photographs
u288 (x=45) 11a Compare daily life in homes, schools, and communities of the past and present using primary sources.
u289 (x=109) Examples: communication, education, jobs, recreation, technology, transportation
=== page 24 === [running header: Grade 1 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u293 (x=119) Living and Working Together in Community and State
u295 Living and Working Together in Community and State helps first grade students acquire knowledge regarding their place in the local community as well as in Alabama. Students develop a deeper sense of their basic rights and responsibilities as citizens, the role of producers and consumers in the economy, the geographic features that surround them, and ways history shapes their culture and state. Students develop an understanding of the past and present by studying different types of evidence, including primary sources and maps.
u296 Course Topics: 1. Civics 2. Economics 3. Geography 4. History
u297 LOOKING BACK, LOOKING AHEAD: First grade builds upon the basic concepts introduced in kinder garten, adding the State of Alabama to the study of family, school, and community. This prepares students for second grade, which explores these concepts with an expanding focus on both Alabama and the United States.
u298 SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u299 The social studies practices listed below develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom. These practices help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in future courses as well as in college, career, and civic life.
u300 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
u301 [T1 R1 C2] ● Use map skills to identify the features of the community, state, and nation. ● Gather relevant information from sources to compare and contrast the way people lived long ago and today. ● Use primary and secondary sources to understand the sequence of events.
=== page 25 === [running header: Grade 1 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u305 [T1 R1 C2] ● Construct an explanation using correct sequence and relevant information. ● Present a summary using print, oral, or digital technologies. ● Identify evidence that supports an argument. ● Ask and answer questions about explanations. ● Use listening, consensus-building, and voting procedures to decide on and take action in their classroom.
u306 (x=86) LIVING AND WORKING TOGETHER IN COMMUNITY AND STATE
u307 (x=227) CONTENT STANDARDS
u308 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8.
u309 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u310 CIVICS
u312 Identify rights and responsibilities of citizens and individuals within the local community and the state.
u313 1a Explain ways in which responsible citizens contribute to the common good of the community and state. Examples: advocating for people in need, community improvement projects, job opportunities, military service, paying taxes, voting
u314 1b Explain how voting enables communities to make choices and decisions.
u316 Identify public offices in the community and state and the duties associated with them.
u317 (x=109) Examples: city council, governor, mayor, state legislature, tribal chair, tribal council
u318 ECONOMICS
u319 3 Explain the role of commercial institutions within the local community, including banks, grocery stores, and other businesses.
u320 3a Explain the concept of using money to acquire goods and services to satisfy needs and wants.
u321 (x=41) 4 Describe ways occupational and recreational opportunities in the local community and state are affected by the physical environment.
u322 (x=109) Examples: agricultural production, industry, tourism
u323 (x=41) 5 Define natural resources and identify examples in their community and state.
u324 (x=109) Examples: coal, cotton, fish, forests, marble
u325 6 Explain how farmers produce food and manufacturers turn raw materials into products.
=== page 26 === [running header: Grade 1 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u329 Examples: car manufacturing, dairy farming, paper production, peach production
u330 6a Explain how products are distributed from producers to sellers to consumers.
u331 GEOGRAPHY
u332 7 Name and locate their local community, county, state, and state capital on a political map.
u333 (x=41) 8 Describe the features of political and physical maps.
u334 (x=109) Examples: political - symbols for capitals, county seats; physical - river, mountain
u335 8a Identify map features, including title, cardinal directions, and key.
u336 8b Construct maps of familiar places. Examples: their room, their home, their school, their community
u337 (x=41) 9 Differentiate among landforms, bodies of water, and other physical features on maps, globes, and satellite and digital images.
u338 (x=109) Examples: lake, mountain, plain, river
u339 HISTORY
u341 Construct calendars, timelines, and daily schedules.
u343 Differentiate between primary and secondary sources.
u344 (x=109) Examples: primary – art, artifacts, interviews, letters, photographs, speeches; secondary – biographies, encyclopedias, interpretive local museums, textbooks
u346 Utilize primary sources to examine the significance of individuals, cultures, celebrations, and historical events within the community and state.
u347 (x=45) 12a
u348 Summarize historical events that have shaped the community and state.
u349 (x=109) Examples: building of Moundville, Battle of Mobile, Montgomery Bus Boycott, Birmingham Children’s Crusade, Space Race, Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill
u350 12b
u351 Identify and describe the contributions of significant individuals associated with the community and state in the past and the present.
u352 Examples: Booker T. Washington, Hank Williams, Helen Keller, Jan Davis, Jesse Owens, Rosa Parks
=== page 27 === [running header: Grade 1 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u356 (x=45) 12c Identify festivals and observances celebrated in the community and state, and describe their historical origins.
u357 (x=109) Examples: Bridge Crossing Jubilee, Mardi Gras, National Peanut Festival, Poarch Creek Thanksgiving Pow Wow, Trail of Tears Commemorative Motorcycle Ride, W.C. Handy Music Festival
u358 (x=44) 12d Identify sites of historical importance in the community and describe their significance.
u359 (x=109) Examples: archives, cemeteries, libraries, monuments, museums, state capitol
u360 (x=41) 13 Utilize primary sources to compare and contrast conditions in their community and state over time.
u361 (x=109) Examples: architecture, city growth, recreational spaces, technology, transportation
=== page 28 === [running header: Grade 2 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u365 (x=136) Living and Working Together in State and Nation
u367 Living and Working Together in State and Nation introduces second grade students to major historical events, figures, and symbols related to the principles and history of Alabama and the United States. Content standards for second grade address the disciplines of civics, economics, geography, and history within the state and nation. The content encourages students to develop an appreciation of shared values that promote respect for the United States’ government, its people, and the diverse cultures, places, and histories that define the nation.
u368 Course Topics: 1. Civics 2. Economics 3. Geography 4. History
u369 LOOKING BACK, LOOKING AHEAD: Kindergarten and first grade introduced basic concepts of civics, economics, geography, and history as students applied these understandings to a study of family, school, community, and state. Second grade provides greater depth, expanding the focus of these concepts to both Alabama and the United States, thus preparing students for Alabama and United States history from third grade through fifth grade.
u370 SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u371 The social studies practices listed below develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom. These practices help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in future courses as well as in college, career, and civic life.
u372 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
u373 [T1 R1 C2] ● Utilize primary and secondary sources to explain the roles of a citizen within the state and nation. ● Evaluate a map to gain information. ● Use primary and secondary sources to explain historical events.
=== page 29 === [running header: Grade 2 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u377 [T1 R1 C2] ● Construct an explanation using correct sequence and relevant information. ● Present a summary using print, oral, or digital technologies. ● Ask and answer questions about arguments. ● Ask and answer questions about explanations. ● Identify and explain a range of local and regional problems and some ways in which people are trying to address these problems. ● Use listening, consensus-building, and voting procedures to decide on and take action in their classroom.
u378 (x=105) LIVING AND WORKING TOGETHER IN STATE AND NATION
u379 (x=227) CONTENT STANDARDS
u380 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8.
u381 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u382 CIVICS
u384 Explain how rights and responsibilities for citizens are part of the American system of government.
u385 (x=51) 1a Describe the reasons for the settlement of the American colonies.
u386 (x=112) Examples: economic opportunities, political liberty, religious freedom
u387 1b Identify American principles found within the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States.
u388 Examples: equality, freedom of religion, independence, individual rights, liberty, limited government
u389 2 Identify the three branches of government and describe their roles.
u390 2a Compare the state and national governments in respect to their powers, roles, and leaders.
u391 3 Explain the voting process.
u392 ECONOMICS
u393 Explain the economic processes of production and distribution, including the roles of producers, consumers, goods, and services.
u395 Examples: forest to building supply store, impounded water to electricity, milk supply from farm to consumer
u396 4a Identify examples of imported and exported goods, including those produced within Alabama.
u397 Examples: imports - fruit, oil; exports - cars, cotton, soybeans
=== page 30 === [running header: Grade 2 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u402 Explain how scarcity influences supply and demand.
u404 Explain how Alabama’s natural resources are utilized in its economy.
u405 (x=109) Examples: cotton and clothing production, food production, pulpwood harvesting, paper manufacturing
u406 GEOGRAPHY
u408 Identify the seven continents, the five oceans, and the Equator shown on maps, globes, and satellite and digital images.
u410 Differentiate between the features of a physical map and a political map, and explain how these features contribute to the map’s purpose.
u411 Examples: physical – mountains, rivers; political – capital symbols, state lines
u413 Compare the physical characteristics of regions throughout the United States, including landforms.
u414 (x=109) Examples: differences in desert, mountain, and tropical regions
u415 9a Describe regions of the state and nation, using vocabulary associated with geographical features of Earth, including bay, hill, island, mountain range, peninsula, plateau, and valley.
u416 10 Identify cardinal and intermediate directions.
u417 10a Utilize gridlines to find locations on a map.
u418 HISTORY
u419 11 Describe segments of time, including year, decade, and century.
u420 (x=41) 12 Describe historical events and celebrations within the state and nation using primary and secondary sources.
u421 (x=109) Examples: calendars, newspapers, photographs, timelines
u422 13 Explain how national historical figures and celebrations relate to fundamental democratic principles.
u423 (x=45) 13a Research and explain the importance of individual founders and significant figures who shaped the nation.
u424 (x=109) Examples: Benjamin Franklin, George Washington, James Madison, Mary Katherine Goddard, Molly Pitcher, Thomas Jefferson
u425 (x=44) 13b Describe the purpose and significance of commonly observed holidays, commemorations, and celebrations.
u426 (x=109) Examples: Flag Day, Independence Day, Juneteenth, Labor Day, Patriot Day, Thanksgiving
=== page 31 === [running header: Grade 2 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u430 13c Describe the Alabama connections to national holidays, including Veterans Day and Martin Luther King, Jr. Day.
u431 (x=44) 13d Explain the history and significance of American symbols and monuments.
u432 (x=109) Examples: bald eagle, Liberty Bell, Lincoln Memorial, Statue of Liberty, United States flag, White House
u433 (x=41) 14 Explain how and why people have moved into and within the United States.
u434 (x=109) Examples: how - travel via ship, foot, plane, automobile; why - desire for better quality of life, economic and religious freedom and opportunities; family connections; disasters
u435 (x=45) 14a Describe the experiences of groups that have migrated to and within the United States throughout history.
u436 (x=109) Examples: Dust Bowl migration, Ellis and Angel Islands, Great Migration, Irish Potato Famine migration, South Vietnamese refugees, Trail of Tears and involuntary migration
u437 (x=41) 15 Identify and summarize legends, stories, and songs that contributed to the cultural fabric of the United States.
u438 (x=109) Examples: Black American stories, Indigenous oral tradition, state and national songs, stories of folk heroes, tall tales
=== page 32 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u441 Grade 3 - 5
u442 Overview
u443 GRADES 3-5
u444 OVERVIEW
u445 Students in Grades 3 through 5 complete a three-year sequence studying Alabama history, geography, economics, and government. The state is not studied in isolation, but contextualized through the introduction of major events in United States history. Grade 3 begins with an examination of Alabama geography and concludes with a study of Indigenous peoples in Alabama and European exploration. In Grade 4, students learn about the formation of both the United States and Alabama, tracing their growth through the late 1800s. Grade 5 outlines the experiences of Alabama and the United States through the trials and achievements of the twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, including the Progressive Era, two World Wars, and the Civil Rights Movement.
u446 Within each course, connections are made between the key discipline of the course and the other relevant themes and disciplines reflected in the 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies. Connecting standards are indicated by icons that link the content knowledge of the primary standard with content knowledge of a related discipline or with Alabama-specific content. Connections with related disciplines are also color coded.
u447 ALABAMA CONNECTION: The map icon indicates a standard that focuses on Alabama content.
u448 CIVICS CONNECTION: The capitol dome icon identifies a standard that connects civics, government, or political science content with the key disciplinary focus of the course.
u449 ECONOMICS CONNECTION: The dollar sign indicates a standard that connects economics content with the key disciplinary focus of the course.
u450 GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION: The compass rose indicates a standard that connects geography content with the key disciplinary focus of the course.
u451 HISTORY CONNECTION: This circular icon representing the passage of time identifies a standard that connects history content with the key disciplinary focus of the course.
u452 Standards in each course are organized into topics. Each grade’s standards are preceded by a skills framework that aligns relevant skills with the disciplinary thinking practices reflective of the four key content areas of the 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies.
=== page 33 === [running header: Grade 3 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u456 (x=41) Alabama in American History and Government I: Geography and Settlement
u458 Alabama in American History and Government I: Geography and Settlement begins a three-year sequence in which students focus on the study of Alabama within the broader context of both the United States and the world. While the course integrates civics, economics, geography, and history, particular focus is placed on geography as students expand their foundational knowledge from earlier grades. Third grade students refine their skills to investigate Alabama’s geographic diversity, begin to grasp essential economic principles influencing their world, and explore the histories of Indigenous peoples along with the initial contact between them and European explorers.
u459 In this course, students will develop and utilize disciplinary skills in civics, economics, geography, and history outlined in the social studies practices below. Additionally, students will use reading and analysis skills to investigate Alabama’s roles in United States history from prehistory through the early 1700s and communicate their conclusions through writing and speaking.
u460 Course Topics: 1. Geography 2. People and the Environment 3. Indigenous Alabama and European Exploration 4. Early Colonization
u461 LOOKING BACK, LOOKING AHEAD: Third grade serves as a bridge between the introduction of social studies concepts and the deeper study of these concepts through Alabama’s history and geography. In second grade, students explored significant historical events, influential figures, and important symbols representing American democratic principles in state and national contexts. In third grade, the focus shifts to understanding Alabama, the United States, and global regions and introducing Indigenous history and the exploration of North America. Students will continue their historical study of Alabama and the United States as they examine history from the colonial era through the late nineteenth century in fourth grade and from 1900 to the present in fifth grade.
u462 SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u463 The two sets of skills outlined below help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in college, career, and civic life: disciplinary thinking skills and social studies practices. The development of disciplinary thinking is foundational to a successful, engaging experience in social studies education. The disciplines are color-coded to show their alignment with disciplinary connection standards.
u464 Each practice in the left column of the table below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they engage in disciplinary thinking in social studies?”
=== page 34 === [running header: Grade 3 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u468 [T1 R1 C2] ● Use maps, satellite images, photographs, and other representations to explain relationships between the locations of places and regions and their environmental features. ● Explain how cultural and environmental characteristics affect the distribution and movement of people, goods, and ideas.
u469 [T1 R2 C2] ● Identify examples of the variety of resources (human capital, physical capital, and natural resources) that are used to produce goods and services. ● Explain why individuals and businesses specialize and trade.
u470 [T1 R3 C2] ● Compare life in specific historical time periods to life today. ● Create and use a chronological sequence of related events to compare developments that happened at the same time. ● Explain probable causes and effects of events and developments.
u471 [T1 R4 C2] ● Explain how groups of people make rules to create responsibilities and protect freedoms. ● Explain how rules and laws change society and how people change rules and laws.
u472 The areas of disciplinary thinking and corresponding skills outlined above provide the tools for students to explore course content at a greater depth and establish a deeper understanding. In addition, the following social studies practices develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom.
u473 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
=== page 35 === [running header: Grade 3 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u477 [T1 R1 C2] ● Use distinctions among fact and opinion to determine the credibility of multiple sources. ● Use primary and secondary sources to explain historical events. ● Use evidence from primary and secondary sources to develop claims in response to compelling questions.
u478 [T1 R2 C2] ● Construct arguments using claims and evidence from multiple sources. ● Construct explanations using reasoning, correct sequence, examples, and details with relevant information and data.
u479 (x=109) ALABAMA IN AMERICAN HISTORY AND GOVERNMENT I:
u480 (x=193) GEOGRAPHY AND SETTLEMENT
u481 (x=227) CONTENT STANDARDS
u482 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8.
u483 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u484 GEOGRAPHY
u486 Locate map features, using geographic terminology to describe them.
u487 (x=109) Examples: compass rose, elevation, legend or key, lines of latitude and longitude, scale, title
u488 1a Identify the Equator, International Date Line, Prime Meridian, Tropic of Capricorn, and Tropic of Cancer, using cardinal and intermediate directions.
u489 1b Locate points on a grid using latitude and longitude coordinates.
u490 1c Use the map scale to calculate the distance between two locations.
u491 Explain how geographic features, including land regions and river systems, connect Alabama to other states.
u493 2a Interpret thematic maps to compare and contrast Alabama to other states. Examples: climate, growing zones, population, use of irrigation, vegetation
=== page 36 === [running header: Grade 3 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u497 [T1 R1 C1] 2b Describe the geographic features and natural resources of Alabama regions, including the Alabama Ridge and Valley, Black Belt, Cumberland Plateau, Highland Rim, Lower Coastal Plain, Piedmont, and Upper Coastal Plain.
u498 [T1 R2 C1] 2c Identify major river systems of Alabama and their points of origin, including the Alabama, Black Warrior, Cahaba, Chattahoochee, Coosa, Mobile, Perdido, Tallapoosa, Tennessee, and Tombigbee Rivers.
u499 [T1 R3 C1] 3
u500 [T1 R3 C2] Research and share information on the development of the state and national park systems and the benefits parks provide.
u501 [T1 R4 C1] 3a Locate state and national parks within Alabama and explain their historical and economic significance. Examples: Horseshoe Bend National Military Park and historic preservation, Little River Canyon National Preserve and outdoor recreation, Trail of Tears National Historic Trail and memorialization
u502 [T1 R5 C1] 4 Locate and describe the significance of state and national symbols, landmarks, and monuments. Examples: symbols - flower, mineral, rock, state and national bird; landmarks Edmund Pettus Bridge, Gateway Arch, National Mall, Rickwood Field, USS Alabama, U.S. Space and Rocket Center; monuments - Freedom Riders National Monument, Mount Rushmore, Russell Cave National Monument
u503 [T2 R1 C1] PEOPLE AND THE ENVIRONMENT
u504 [T2 R2 C1] 5
u505 [T2 R2 C2] Explain the economic, geographic, and social impact of natural disasters over time. Examples: effects - erosion, farming production, increased migration, outbreaks of disease, shaping of coastal ecology, tourism; types of disasters - drought, floods, hurricanes, tornadoes
u506 [T2 R3 C1] 6 Describe how Alabama’s environment has been positively and negatively affected by human activity over time. Examples: conservation, deforestation and reforestation, land management, misuse of natural resources, pollution, restocking fish in lakes
u507 INDIGENOUS ALABAMA AND EUROPEAN EXPLORATION
u508 Compare and contrast the roles of anthropologists, archaeologists, and paleontologists.
u510 Describe Indigenous cultures, governments, and economies in the Southeast prior to European colonization.
u512 Examples: arts and crafts, Moundbuilders, trading
=== page 37 === [running header: Grade 3 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u516 8a Identify changes that took place in prehistoric/pre-contact cultures in the Southeast between the Paleo, Archaic, Woodland, and Mississippian periods.
u517 Examples: modifications in architecture, art, foodways, and tools
u518 8b Describe key characteristics of different tribes in Alabama in the Mississippian Period, contrasting social customs, political organization, and religious practices.
u519 Examples: Alabama, Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, Coushatta, Muscogee Creek, Shawnee, Yuchi
u520 (x=41) 9 Explain reasons for European expeditions and the establishment of early settlements and colonies in North America during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
u521 (x=109) Examples: Jamestown, Plymouth, Roanoke, St. Augustine, Williamsburg
u522 9a Trace and compare routes of early explorers of North and South America. Examples: Alonso Álvarez de Pineda (Alabama), Christopher Columbus, Francisco Pizarro, Francisco Vasquez de Coronado, Hernando Cortez, Juan Ponce de León, Leif Erikson
u523 9b Describe key parts of Hernando de Soto’s expedition through Alabama and explain its effects on Alabama’s Indigenous peoples.
u524 [T1 R1 C1] EARLY COLONIZATION
u525 [T1 R2 C1] 10
u526 [T1 R2 C2] Explain why interactions and conflicts occurred between Europeans and Indigenous peoples in the Southeast from 1519 to the early 1700s, including differing beliefs regarding culture, land use and ownership, religion, and trade.
u527 11 Describe French expeditions and colonization of Alabama, including the efforts of the LeMoyne brothers (Iberville and Bienville), establishment of forts, relationships with Indigenous peoples, and fur trade.
u528 [T2 R1 C1] 11a
u529 [T2 R1 C2] Locate on maps the French settlements in early Alabama, including Mobile (1702), Fort Toulouse (1717), and Fort Condé (1723), and describe their significance.
=== page 38 === [running header: Grade 4 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u533 (x=74) Alabama in American History and Government II: Colonies to 1900
u535 Alabama in American History and Government II: Colonies to 1900 continues the exploration of United States and Alabama history. Fourth grade content begins with the colonial period and the development of both the United States and Alabama, then follows their history through the late nineteenth century. Students survey major events from the American Revolution, Westward Expansion, Civil War, and Reconstruction periods while following Alabama’s own formation and challenges during these events.
u536 In this course, students will develop and utilize disciplinary skills in civics, economics, geography, and history outlined in the social studies practices below. Additionally, students will use reading and analysis skills to investigate Alabama’s role in United States history from the Revolutionary era through the end of the nineteenth century and communicate their conclusions through writing and speaking.
u537 Course Topics: 1. Colonial Regions 2. American Revolution and Early Republic 3. Early Westward Expansion 4. Civil War and Reconstruction 5. Post-Civil War Westward Expansion
u538 LOOKING BACK, LOOKING AHEAD: Students in third grade through fifth grade learn the story of United States history with a focus on Alabama history. Third grade students began their study of Alabama and United States history with prehistoric cultures and through the colonial era. Fourth grade students continue from the colonial era through the latter part of the nineteenth century. In fifth grade, students will continue to journey through the history of Alabama and the United States from the beginning of the twentieth century through the present day.
u539 [T1 R1 C1] SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u540 [T1 R2 C1] The two sets of skills outlined below help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in college, career, and civic life: disciplinary thinking skills and social studies practices. The development of disciplinary thinking is foundational to a successful, engaging experience in social studies education. The disciplines are color-coded to show their alignment with disciplinary connection standards. Each practice in the left column of the table below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they engage in disciplinary thinking in social studies?”
u541 [T1 R3 C2] ● Use maps, satellite images, photographs, and other representations to explain relationships between the locations of places and regions and their environmental characteristics. ● Explain how cultural and environmental characteristics affect the distribution and movement of people, goods, and ideas. ● Explain how human settlements and movements relate to the locations and uses of various natural resources.
=== page 39 === [running header: Grade 4 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u545 [T1 R1 C2] ● Describe why people in one country or region trade goods and services with people in other countries or regions. ● Identify positive and negative incentives that influence the decisions people make.
u546 [T1 R2 C2] ● Infer the intended audience and purpose of a historical source from information within the source itself. ● Explain why individuals and groups during the same historical period differed in their perspectives.
u547 [T1 R3 C2] ● Describe ways in which people benefit from and are challenged by working together, including through government, workplaces, voluntary organizations, and families. ● Explain how rules and laws change society and how people change rules and laws. ● Examine the origins and purposes of rules, laws, and key United States constitutional provisions.
u548 The areas of disciplinary thinking and corresponding skills outlined above provide the tools for students to explore course content at a greater depth and establish a deeper understanding. In addition, the following social studies practices develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom.
u549 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
u550 [T2 R1 C2] ● Use distinctions between fact and opinion to determine the credibility of multiple sources. ● Use primary and secondary sources to explain historical events. ● Use evidence from primary and secondary sources to develop claims in response to compelling questions.
=== page 40 === [running header: Grade 4 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u554 [T1 R1 C2] ● Construct written arguments using claims and evidence from multiple sources. ● Present a summary of arguments and explanations to others using print and oral technologies (e.g., posters, essays, letters, debates, speeches, and reports) and digital technologies (e.g., Internet and digital documentary).
u555 (x=106) ALABAMA IN AMERICAN HISTORY AND GOVERNMENT II:
u556 (x=242) COLONIES TO 1900 CONTENT STANDARDS
u557 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8.
u558 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u559 [T2 R1 C1] COLONIAL REGIONS
u560 [T2 R2 C1] 1
u561 [T2 R2 C2] Describe cooperation and conflict between the English, French, and Spanish colonists and Indigenous people over the fur trade, slave trade, and land claims.
u562 [T2 R3 C1] 1a
u563 [T2 R3 C2] Map the locations of significant European settlements and major Indigenous nations in North America and Alabama.
u564 [T2 R4 C1] 2
u565 [T2 R4 C2] Compare and contrast the physical geography of the Northern, Middle, and Southern colonies, including geographic features and differences in climate, and explain how geography impacted settlement.
u566 [T2 R5 C1] 3
u567 [T2 R5 C2] Explain the reasons for the establishment of the labor systems used in colonial America, including apprenticeship, indentured servitude, and slavery, and describe the differences among them.
u568 [T2 R6 C1] 3a
u569 [T2 R6 C2] Describe the triangular trade system, including the Middle Passage of the transatlantic slave trade, and describe the experiences of West Africans before and after being kidnapped and forced into slavery.
u570 [T2 R7 C1] 4
u571 [T2 R7 C2] Describe how the contributions of various groups living in colonial North America helped colonies develop, including artisans, farmers, large landowners, tradespeople, women, children, Indigenous peoples, enslaved people, and indentured servants.
u572 [T2 R8 C1] 4a Describe the contributions of key individuals who established and developed early American colonies. Examples: George Calvert, James Oglethorpe, Roger Williams, William Penn
=== page 41 === [running header: Grade 4 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u576 AMERICAN REVOLUTION AND EARLY REPUBLIC
u578 Summarize the causes of the French and Indian War and describe how its outcomes increased tensions that led to the American Revolution.
u579 [T1 R1 C1] 5a Explain how the French and Indian War affected power, trade, and claims to lands in Alabama for both Native Americans and European nations. Examples: abandonment of Fort Toulouse, competing British and Spanish claims, Fort Condé becoming Fort Charlotte
u580 [T1 R2 C1] 5b Describe key events that caused tension and led American colonists to protest against Great Britain, including the Sugar Act, Stamp Act, Townshend Acts, Boston Massacre, Tea Act, Boston Tea Party, and Intolerable Acts.
u581 [T1 R3 C1] 6 Identify and describe key events of the American Revolution, including the Battles of Lexington and Concord, Saratoga, and Yorktown.
u582 [T1 R4 C1] 6a Summarize the contributions of different groups and individuals to the American Revolution. Examples: leaders - Benjamin Franklin, George Washington, John Adams, Thomas Jefferson; citizens - Abigail Adams, James Armistead Lafayette, Molly Pitcher, Phillis Wheatley, Peter Salem; groups - Loyalists, minutemen, Patriots
u583 [T1 R5 C1] 6b Describe events that took place in Alabama during the Revolution, including the Spanish seizure of Mobile and the Battle of Fort Charlotte, and explain the involvement of Native Americans.
u584 [T1 R6 C1] 6c
u585 [T1 R6 C2] Summarize the principles of the Declaration of Independence.
u586 [T1 R7 C1] 6d
u587 [T1 R7 C2] Explain how the Treaty of Paris (1783) and Pinckney’s Treaty helped set the boundaries of the United States, including the area that would become Alabama.
u588 [T1 R8 C1] 7
u589 [T1 R8 C2] Summarize the key factors leading to the ratification of the Constitution, including the weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation, Shays’ Rebellion, and the Constitutional Convention with its compromises.
u590 [T1 R9 C1] 7a
u591 [T1 R9 C2] Describe the system of government established by the Constitution, including the three branches of government and their functions.
u592 [T1 R10 C1] 7b
u593 [T1 R10 C2] Explain why the Bill of Rights was added to the Constitution and how the amendment process allows changes to protect or expand rights.
u594 EARLY WESTWARD EXPANSION
u595 Explain how the Louisiana Purchase and the actions of the Corps of Discovery accelerated westward expansion of the United States.
u597 Examples: Meriwether Lewis, Sacagawea, William Clark, York
=== page 42 === [running header: Grade 4 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u601 [T1 R1 C1] 8a
u602 [T1 R1 C2] Summarize how the Federal Road increased access to Creek Territory for settlers and enslaved persons, and explain how their arrival affected Native Americans. Examples: Benjamin Hawkins and “Plan of Civilization,” development of inns and taverns, establishment of Fort Stoddert, Treaty of Washington (1805)
u603 [T1 R2 C1] 9 Outline the major causes and events of the War of 1812. Examples: impressment, invasion of Canada, burning of the White House, Battle of Fort McHenry and “The Star-Spangled Banner,” Battle of New Orleans
u604 [T1 R3 C1] 9a Describe the causes of the Creek War within the context of the War of 1812 and explain the social, political, and economic effects on Alabama and the nation. Examples: Andrew Jackson’s legacy, forcing Native Americans to relocate, Native Americans assimilating to European culture, opening Alabama land for settlers, United States acquiring tribal lands in Alabama
u605 [T1 R4 C1] 9b Identify significant battles and leaders of the Creek War. Examples: battles - Burnt Corn Creek, Fort Mims, Horseshoe Bend; leaders - Andrew Jackson, Benjamin Hawkins, Chief Menewa, Pushmataha, William McIntosh, William Weatherford
u606 [T1 R5 C1] 10 Explain how “Alabama fever” influenced Alabama's settlement, economic growth, and political development, leading to statehood and the 1819 constitution.
u607 [T1 R6 C1] 10a
u608 [T1 R6 C2] Identify contributions of Alabama’s early political leaders, including William Wyatt Bibb, Thomas Bibb, Israel Pickens, William Rufus King, and John W. Walker.
u609 [T1 R7 C1] 10b
u610 [T1 R7 C2] Outline political and geographic reasons for changing the location of Alabama’s state capital. Examples: St. Stephens, Huntsville, Cahaba, Tuscaloosa, Montgomery
u611 [T1 R8 C1] 11 Describe events and factors that led to the United States' expansion prior to the Civil War, including conflicts, technological developments, trails, and the Gold Rush of 1849. Examples: technology - Conestoga wagon, cotton gin, steamboat, steam locomotive, telegraph; trails - Oregon Trail, Mormon Trail, Santa Fe Trail; conflicts - Texas Revolution (1835), Mexican-American War (1846-1848)
u612 [T1 R9 C1] 11a
u613 [T1 R9 C2] Locate states admitted to the United States between 1812 and 1860 and categorize these states as either “free” or “slave” states.
u614 12 Explain how the growth of the United States from 1812 to 1860 changed economic and social life in Alabama.
u615 [T2 R1 C1] 12a
u616 [T2 R1 C2] Identify different trades and occupations of Alabamians in the period from 1812 to 1860. Examples: blacksmiths, cotton trade, manufacturing, yeoman farmers
=== page 43 === [running header: Grade 4 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u620 (x=44) 12b Describe the living and working conditions and the cultural practices of enslaved persons engaged in skilled trades, domestic roles, and agricultural production, including effects of the domestic slave trade on their lives.
u621 (x=109) Examples: skilled trades - blacksmiths, carpenters, coopers; domestic roles - cooks, housemaids, seamstresses; agriculture - cotton, timber; effects of slave trade relocation, family separations; cultural practices - folktales, foodways, religious traditions
u622 12c Explain how the Indian Removal Act (1830), Second Creek War (1836) and economic policies affected the lives, rights, and territories of the Muscogee Creek, Cherokee, Choctaw, Chickasaw, and Seminole tribes.
u623 (x=44) 12d Describe the development of educational institutions in Alabama from statehood through 1860.
u624 (x=109) Examples: University of Alabama (1820), Spring Hill College (1830), Judson College (1838), Barton Academy (1852), Tuskegee Female College (1854), East Alabama Male College (1856)
u625 CIVIL WAR AND RECONSTRUCTION
u626 13 Describe how slavery contributed to sectional disagreements, divisions over states’ rights, and economic disputes resulting in the Civil War.
u627 [T1 R1 C1] 13a Identify and describe how key events from the Missouri Compromise (1820) to the election of Abraham Lincoln (1860) contributed to growing sectional divisions. Examples: Nat Turner’s Rebellion, Compromise of 1850, Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857), John Brown’s Raid
u628 [T1 R2 C1] 13b Describe the influence of abolitionists, including enslaved persons and self-liberated Black Americans, on efforts to end slavery in the United States. Examples: Frederick Douglass, Harriet Beecher Stowe, Harriet Tubman, Peter Still (Alabama), Sojourner Truth, William Lloyd Garrison
u629 [T1 R3 C1] 13c Describe the significance of the Clotilda’s delivery of kidnapped people to Mobile Bay as an effort to expand slavery.
u630 [T1 R4 C1] 13d
u631 [T1 R4 C2] Summarize Alabama’s role in the formation of the Confederate States of America, including the pivotal events that took place in Montgomery and the division over secession in the northern part of the state. Examples: Free State of Winston, Jefferson Davis’s inauguration, Nickajack region’s statehood efforts, Unionist meeting at Looney’s Tavern
u632 [T1 R5 C1] 14 Evaluate how key figures contributed to events that shaped the United States’ victory in the Civil War. Examples: leadership - Abraham Lincoln and the Emancipation Proclamation, Ulysses S. Grant and victory at Vicksburg/capture of the Mississippi River, William Tecumseh Sherman and the March to the Sea, Robert E. Lee and surrender at Appomattox Court House; citizens
=== page 44 === [running header: Grade 4 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u636 [T1 R1 C1] Clara Barton and medical treatment, Harriet Tubman and role as a spy, guide, and soldier, Elizabeth Van Lew and espionage efforts, Robert Smalls and naval actions
u637 [T1 R2 C1] 14a
u638 [T1 R2 C2] Identify Alabama’s economic and military contributions to the Civil War, including weapons manufacturing, soldiers, and the use of and resistance to conscripted enslaved labor. Examples: economic - Clarke County salt production, Selma Ordnance and Naval Foundry; military - Joseph Wheeler (CSA), Ralph Semmes (CSA), First Alabama Cavalry (USA), First Alabama Volunteer Infantry Regiment/55th United States Colored Infantry Regiment (USA)
u639 [T1 R3 C1] 14b
u640 [T1 R3 C2] Locate and describe the impact of significant Civil War battles, including those affecting Alabama, and identify the location of Confederate states, states remaining loyal to the United States, and capital cities of the Confederacy and United States. Examples: major battles - Fort Sumter, Antietam, Gettysburg, Vicksburg; Alabama battles - Sack of Athens (1862), Mobile Bay (1864), Fort Henderson (1864), Fort Blakely (1865), Selma (1865); capital cities - Washington, D.C., Montgomery, Richmond
u641 [T1 R4 C1] 14c
u642 [T1 R4 C2] Describe how the Civil War affected the people of Alabama, including the end of slavery, destruction of transportation systems, collapse of the economy, and the role of women on the home front. Examples: casualty rates, conscription, Mobile bread riots, Wilson’s Raid; women Augusta Wilson and Confederate literature, Juliet Opie Hopkins and establishment of hospitals, Kate Cumming and nursing
u643 [T1 R5 C1] 14d Summarize events that marked the conclusion of the Civil War, including the assassination of President Lincoln, the surrender of Confederate armies, the spread of emancipation, and Emancipation and Juneteenth celebrations in Alabama and other states.
u644 [T1 R6 C1] 15 Identify major events of Reconstruction and evaluate the outcomes of Reconstruction policies.
u645 [T1 R7 C1] 15a
u646 [T1 R7 C2] Explain political changes in Alabama during Reconstruction, including new state constitutions, Black Codes, changes in political parties, voting rights, and citizenship rights for Black Americans. Examples: military rule, presence of Freedmen’s Bureau, Alabama’s readmittance to the United States, 1868 and 1875 Constitutions, Thirteenth (1865), Fourteenth (1868), and Fifteenth (1870) Amendments
u647 [T1 R8 C1] 15b Describe the effects of Reconstruction on education and social institutions in Alabama. Examples: educational reform, establishment of additional Black churches, establishment of segregated schools, Morrill Land Grant Act and expansion of higher education, opening of normal schools
u648 [T1 R9 C1] 15c Explain how Africatown was established, describing the challenges its founders overcame and the ways they built community. Examples: Charles Lewis, Charlie Poteet, Cudjoe Kazoola Lewis, Jabez
=== page 45 === [running header: Grade 4 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u652 (x=44) 15d Recount the contributions of Alabamians who helped shape their state during Reconstruction.
u653 (x=109) Examples: Benjamin Turner and extension of rights to former Confederates, Horace King and infrastructure development, James Rapier and Civil Rights Act of 1875, Maria Fearing and Talladega College, Noah Cloud and public education
u654 POST-CIVIL WAR DEVELOPMENTS AND EXPANSION
u655 (x=41) 16 Describe how political and social changes of the late 1870s to 1900 affected Black and white Alabamians, including the introduction of Jim Crow laws, sharecropping, voting restrictions, and violence.
u656 (x=109) Examples: Election Day Riots of 1874, John Hollis Bankhead and expansion of convict-leasing system, Plessy v. Ferguson (1896)
u657 [T1 R1 C1] 16a Describe how industry, trade, farming, and the rise of Populism changed Alabama after the Civil War and shaped its economy and communities in the late 1800s. Examples: changes in trade practices; demands from small farmers (yeoman) for reform; growth of industries like cotton, lumber, turpentine, and iron production; shift to small-scale farming and crop diversification
u658 [T1 R2 C1] 17 Describe the social, political, and economic impacts of the conflicts, legislation, and treaties that led to the United States acquiring additional territory after the Civil War.
u659 [T1 R3 C1] 17a Explain how territorial expansion and the construction of the transcontinental railroad affected immigrants and Native Americans, including how it led to the loss of land in Indian Territory where Alabama tribes had been relocated. Examples: employment opportunities for immigrants, mistreatment of immigrants, Chinese Exclusion Act (1882), Dawes Act (1887), Oklahoma Land Rush (1889), Ghost Dance Movement and Wounded Knee Massacre (1890)
u660 [T1 R4 C1] 17b
u661 [T1 R4 C2] Locate states admitted to and territories acquired by the United States between 1865 and 1900, and describe how these additional territories were acquired. Examples: states - Nebraska (1867), Colorado (1876), Utah (1896); territories Puerto Rico (1898), Guam (1898), Alaska District (1867), Hawaii Territory (1898)
=== page 46 === [running header: Grade 5 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u665 (x=26) Alabama in American History and Government III: Twentieth Century to Present
u667 Alabama in American History and Government III: Twentieth Century to Present focuses on the history of the United States from the Progressive Era to present day, emphasizing Alabama’s contributions to and impact on this period. The course explores historical topics from the Progressive Era, World War I, the Great Depression, World War II, the Civil Rights Movement, and Cold War into the present. Standards are designed to help students acquire a deeper understanding of cultures, perspectives, and experiences that are both similar to and different from their own.
u668 In this course, students will develop and utilize disciplinary skills in civics, economics, geography, and history outlined in the social studies practices below. Additionally, students will use reading and analysis skills to investigate Alabama’s role in United States’ history during the twentieth century and communicate their conclusions through writing and speaking.
u669 Course Topics: 1. Progressive Era and World War I 2. Roaring Twenties, Great Depression, and New Deal 3. World War II 4. Mid-Twentieth Century, National Effects of World War II 5. Mid-Twentieth Century, International Effects of World War II 6. 1970s to Today
u670 LOOKING BACK, LOOKING AHEAD: Fifth grade concludes the three-year study of Alabama and United States history and geography with a survey of the twentieth century to the present. In third grade, students began this sequence with the physical and political geography of the United States and Indigenous history of Alabama. In fourth grade, students learned about the establishment of both the United States and Alabama, as well as the challenges they both encountered during the nineteenth century. In sixth grade, students will revisit in greater depth the history of the colonization and founding of the United States and receive an introduction to basic government principles through a civics lens.
u671 SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u672 The two sets of skills outlined below help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in college, career, and civic life: disciplinary thinking skills and social studies practices. The development of disciplinary thinking is foundational to a successful, engaging experience in social studies education. The disciplines are color-coded to show their alignment with disciplinary connection standards.
u673 Each practice in the left column of the table below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they engage in disciplinary thinking in social studies?”
=== page 47 === [running header: Grade 5 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u677 [T1 R1 C2] ● Use maps, satellite images, photographs, and other representations to explain relationships between the locations of places and regions and their environmental characteristics. ● Explain how human settlements and movements relate to the locations and uses of various natural resources. ● Describe how environmental and cultural characteristics influence population distribution in specific places or regions.
u678 [T1 R2 C2] ● Explain the meaning of inflation, deflation, and unemployment. ● Explain the ways in which the government pays for the goods and services it provides. ● Explain the effects of increasing economic interdependence on different groups within participating nations.
u679 [T1 R3 C2] ● Classify a series of historical events and developments as examples of change and/or continuity. ● Generate questions about individuals and groups who have shaped significant historical changes. ● Compare life in specific historical time periods to life today. ● Explain why individuals and groups during the same historical period differed in their perspectives.
u680 [T1 R4 C2] ● Identify core civic virtues and democratic principles that guide government, society, and communities. ● Examine the origins and purposes of rules, laws, and key United States constitutional provisions. ● Explain how groups of people make rules to create responsibilities and protect freedoms. ● Explain how policies are developed to address public problems.
u681 The areas of disciplinary thinking and corresponding skills outlined above provide the tools for students to explore course content at a greater depth and establish a deeper understanding. In addition, the following social studies practices develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom.
u682 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
=== page 48 === [running header: Grade 5 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u686 [T1 R1 C2] ● Evaluate a source by distinguishing between fact and opinion. ● Gather relevant information from multiple sources, using their origin, structure, and context to guide the selection. ● Use evidence from primary and secondary sources to develop claims in response to compelling questions.
u687 [T1 R2 C2] ● Ask and answer questions about arguments. ● Construct written arguments using claims and evidence from multiple sources. ● Draw on disciplinary concepts to explain the challenges people have faced and opportunities they have created, in addressing local, regional, and national problems at various times and places. ● Present a summary of arguments and explanations to others using print and oral technologies (e.g., posters, essays, letters, debates, speeches, and reports) and digital technologies (e.g., Internet and digital documentary).
u688 (x=108) ALABAMA IN AMERICAN HISTORY AND GOVERNMENT 3:
u689 (x=188) TWENTIETH CENTURY - PRESENT
u690 (x=227) CONTENT STANDARDS
u691 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8.
u692 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u693 [T2 R1 C1] PROGRESSIVE ERA AND WORLD WAR I
u694 [T2 R2 C1] 1
u695 [T2 R2 C2] Explain how industry and agriculture expanded during the early twentieth century.
u696 [T2 R3 C1] 1a
u697 [T2 R3 C2] Summarize how important entrepreneurs and inventors shaped American society, and identify Alabamians who contributed to these innovations. Examples: national - Andrew Carnegie, Henry T. Ford, John D. Rockefeller, Julius Rosenwald, Lewis Latimer, Madame C.J. Walker; Alabama - George Washington Carver, Ida Brandon Mathis, Mary Anderson
u698 [T2 R4 C1] 1b
u699 [T2 R4 C2] Describe the emergence of new forms of economic activity in Alabama at the turn of the twentieth century, including the iron, steel, textile, and timber industries.
u700 [T2 R5 C1] 1c
u701 [T2 R5 C2] Outline reasons for the growth of urban areas at the turn of the twentieth century, including Birmingham. Examples: Good Roads Movement, increased immigration, industrialization, improved transportation
=== page 49 === [running header: Grade 5 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u705 [T1 R1 C1] 2 Describe Progressive Era political reforms in both the United States and Alabama.
u706 [T1 R2 C1] 2a
u707 [T1 R2 C2] Summarize how women in Alabama participated in the suffrage movement prior to the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment. Examples: Alabama Equal Suffrage Association, Alabama Federation of Women’s Clubs, Marie Bankhead Owen, Pattie Ruffner Jacobs, Women’s Anti-Ratification League of Alabama
u708 [T1 R3 C1] 2b
u709 [T1 R3 C2] Describe how the Populist Movement influenced the creation of the 1901 Alabama Constitution and explain the effects of its adoption, including disenfranchisement of voters through literacy tests and poll taxes that affected both Black and white male small farmers and laborers.
u710 [T1 R4 C1] 2c Identify and describe examples of prison reform, including the abolition of the convict-lease system and leadership of Julia Tutwiler.
u711 [T1 R5 C1] 3 Describe Progressive Era social reforms in both the United States and Alabama.
u712 [T1 R6 C1] 3a Explain how legislation, individuals, and groups extended educational opportunities in Alabama. Examples: Anna T. Jeanes Fund, Booker T. Washington and Rosenwald Schools, expansion of historically Black colleges and universities (HBCUs), Governor Braxton Bragg Comer and compulsory education, Maud Lindsay’s free kindergarten
u713 [T1 R7 C1] 3b
u714 [T1 R7 C2] Summarize the role of labor unions and reformers in changing laws governing working conditions. Examples: national - child labor laws, eight-hour workday, safety reforms, workers’ compensation laws; Alabama - Alabama Child Labor Committee, Birmingham District Coal Strike (1908), Loraine Bedsole Tunstall and Alabama Department of Child Welfare, United Mine Workers (Birmingham)
u715 [T1 R8 C1] 3c Summarize Helen Keller’s life and her contributions to disability rights.
u716 [T1 R9 C1] 4
u717 [T1 R9 C2] Analyze the reasons for increased immigration to, and migration within, the United States and Alabama in the early twentieth century.
u718 [T1 R10 C1] 4a
u719 [T1 R10 C2] Compare the experiences of immigrants who entered the United States through various ports of entry, including Ellis Island, Angel Island, and the southern border.
u720 [T1 R11 C1] 4b Identify the economic and social conditions that led to the start of the Great Migration.
u721 [T1 R12 C1] 5 Summarize the primary causes and consequences of World War I.
u722 [T1 R13 C1] 5a Identify and explain international events that led to the United States’ entry into World War I. Examples: Sinking of the Lusitania, Zimmermann Telegram
=== page 50 === [running header: Grade 5 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u726 [T1 R1 C1] 5b
u727 [T1 R1 C2] Identify the countries of the Triple Entente and Central Powers during World War I and locate them on a map.
u728 [T1 R2 C1] 5c Describe the roles and contributions of Alabamians, including the 167th Infantry Regiment (4th Alabama), to the war effort during World War I. Examples: Anne Mae Beddow, James Reese Europe, Osmond Kelly Ingram, Robert Moton, Robert Lee Bullard, Sister Chrysostom Moynahan
u729 [T1 R3 C1] 5d
u730 [T1 R3 C2] Locate Alabama military training camps, ammunition depots, and the Port of Mobile on a map and explain their role in World War I efforts. Examples: Camp McClellan, Camp Sheridan, Maxwell Field, Taylor Field
u731 ROARING TWENTIES, GREAT DEPRESSION, AND NEW DEAL
u733 Identify the contributions of Alabamians to sports, film, and the arts during the early twentieth century, the Harlem Renaissance, and the Jazz Age.
u734 Examples: Joe Louis, Negro Southern League, Tallulah Bankhead, W. C. Handy, Zelda and F. Scott Fitzgerald, Zora Neale Hurston
u735 [T2 R1 C1] 6a
u736 [T2 R1 C2] Explain how overcropping, the boll weevil, and low cotton prices affected farmers in Alabama.
u737 [T2 R2 C1] 7
u738 [T2 R2 C2] Describe the economic developments in the United States during the Roaring Twenties that caused the 1929 stock market crash. Examples: bull market, decline in money supply, post-war economic growth, speculative trading
u739 7a Explain how the Great Depression impacted Alabamians and the nation, including increased labor tensions.
u740 Examples: nationwide - Hoovervilles, mass unemployment, soup kitchens; Alabama Alabama Sharecroppers’ Union, General Textile Strike of 1934, tenant farming, union organizing
u741 [T3 R1 C1] 7b
u742 [T3 R1 C2] Identify key characteristics of the Dust Bowl and the regions affected by it. Examples: drought, erosion, farm relief, migration, soil erosion
u743 [T3 R2 C1] 8
u744 [T3 R2 C2] Analyze how the government-funded New Deal programs of President Franklin D. Roosevelt impacted American society.
u745 8a Identify the contributions of reformers during the New Deal, including Alabama political and civic leaders.
u746 Examples: national - Eleanor Roosevelt, Frances Perkins, Mary McLeod Bethune; Alabama - Pauline Fletcher and Camp Margaret Murray Washington, Representative Henry Steagall and the Glass-Steagall Act, Senator Hugo Black and the Fair Labor Standards Act, Speaker of the House William Bankhead and the Bankhead Jones Farm Tenant Act, Southern Conference for Human Welfare
=== page 51 === [running header: Grade 5 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u750 8b Identify and describe New Deal projects that helped bring relief to Alabama. Examples: Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA), Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), Indian Reorganization Act (IRA), Social Security Administration, Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), Works Progress Administration (WPA)
u751 WORLD WAR II
u753 Describe the reasons for the United States’ entry into World War II and identify its contributions toward the defeat of the Axis powers.
u754 [T1 R1 C1] 9a
u755 [T1 R1 C2] Compare totalitarianism and democracy as represented in the Axis and Allied powers prior to war in Europe.
u756 9b Explain the military contributions of Americans during World War II, including the achievements of the Tuskegee Airmen and Alabama Medal of Honor recipients.
u757 Examples: 442nd Infantry Regiment, 6888th Central Postal Directory Battalion, Native American Code Talkers, Women's Army Corps (WAC); Medal of Honor recipients - Charles Thomas, Henry “Red” Erwin, Howard Gilmore, Paul Bolden
u758 [T2 R1 C1] 9c Explain the significance of major events in the war, including Pearl Harbor, internment of Japanese-Americans, D-Day, the Holocaust, Victory in Europe (VE) Day, the development and use of the atomic bomb, and Victory over Japan (VJ) Day.
u759 [T2 R2 C1] 10 Describe how Alabamians contributed to the war effort during World War II.
u760 [T2 R3 C1] 10a Explain Alabama’s contributions to military production during World War II. Examples: aluminum production, Birmingham steel industry, Huntsville Arsenal, Percy Julian and firefighting foam, Port of Mobile, cotton and textile production
u761 [T2 R4 C1] 10b
u762 [T2 R4 C2] Locate military installations in Alabama during World War II on a map, including Redstone Arsenal, Camp Rucker (Fort Novosel), Fort McClellan, Craig Army Air Base, Brookley Field, Tuskegee Army Air Field, and major POW camps in Alabama.
u763 [T2 R5 C1] 10c Explain how women and Black Alabamians sought and received new employment opportunities during World War II that were not previously available. Examples: Bess Bolden Walcott as Field Director for the Red Cross, Executive Order 8802, Nancy Batson and the Women’s Airforce Service Pilots (WASPs), women welders of ADDSCO in Mobile
u764 MID-TWENTIETH CENTURY, NATIONAL EFFECTS OF WORLD WAR II
u765 (x=41) 11 Describe how the United States’ economy grew and American culture changed after World War II.
u766 (x=109) Examples: consumerism, G.I. Bill, growth of suburbs, Interstate Highway System, rock and roll, television
=== page 52 === [running header: Grade 5 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u770 [T1 R1 C1] 11a Identify Alabamians who contributed to the growth of American culture post-World War II into the 1970s. Examples: Bear Bryant, Hank Aaron, Hank Williams, Harper Lee, Nat King Cole, Tammy Wynette
u771 [T1 R2 C1] 11b
u772 [T1 R2 C2] Describe the decline of farming and the growth of urban areas in Alabama after World War II.
u773 [T1 R3 C1] 12 Outline key events and campaigns of the Civil Rights Movement and identify significant organizations and their contributions within the Movement. Examples: events - Greensboro Sit-In, March on Washington, Freedom Summer, Fair Housing Act of 1968; organizations - John Lewis and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, Martin Luther King, Jr. and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference
u774 [T1 R4 C1] 12a Describe ways in which the Civil Rights Movement sought to create change. Examples: boycotts, church meetings, school desegregation, sit-ins, tenant farmers’ strike, voting rights protests
u775 [T1 R5 C1] 12b Trace the chronology of civil rights events in Alabama and across the nation, and summarize how they impacted one another. Examples: Brown v. Board of Education (1954) and school desegregation, Boynton v. Virginia (1960) and the Freedom Rides, Birmingham Movement and the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Selma-to-Montgomery Marches and Voting Rights Act of 1965
u776 [T1 R6 C1] 12c Describe the contributions of Alabama leaders and foot soldiers of the Civil Rights Movement as well as other Alabamian supporters who aided their efforts. Examples: leaders - Fred Shuttlesworth, Charles Gomillion, John LeFlore, Marie Foster, Rosa Parks, T.Y. Rogers; foot soldiers - Autherine Lucy, Freedom Quilting Bee, Georgia Gilmore, Gwendolyn Webb, Sonnie Hereford III; supporters - A.G. Gaston, Frank Johnson, Fred Gray, Charles Morgan, Juliette Hampton Morgan, Virginia Foster Durr
u777 [T1 R7 C1] 12d Summarize how opponents of the Civil Rights Movement in Alabama sought to limit its success. Examples: Bloody Sunday, Bloody Tuesday, bombing of 16th Street Baptist Church, Dynamite Hill, Massive Resistance, Stand in the Schoolhouse Door
u778 [T1 R8 C1] 12e Identify Alabamians who contributed to concurrent civil rights movements in the United States during the decades following World War II. Examples: Jack Daughtry and school desegregation for Native American children, Nina Gail Thrower and Native American education, Nina Miglionico and women’s rights, Yolande Betbeze and women’s rights
=== page 53 === [running header: Grade 5 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u782 [T1 R1 C1] MID-TWENTIETH CENTURY, INTERNATIONAL EFFECTS OF WORLD WAR II
u783 [T1 R2 C1] 13
u784 [T1 R2 C2] Summarize why the United States sought to contain communism during the Cold War, and locate major communist countries from the Cold War era on a map. Examples: China, Cuba, North Korea, North Vietnam, Soviet Union
u785 [T1 R3 C1] 14 Describe how the United States’ involvement in the Cold War influenced domestic and international events.
u786 [T1 R4 C1] 14a Explain reasons for the United States’ involvement in the Korean War and Vietnam War and describe the involvement of Alabamians in these conflicts. Examples: anti-war protests, helicopter pilot training at Fort Rucker (Novesel), Jeremiah Denton and POWs, Medal of Honor recipients, migration of Vietnamese refugees to Alabama, training of Air Force leaders at Maxwell Air Force Base
u787 [T1 R5 C1] 14b Describe how technological innovations boosted space exploration during the Space Race, including the role of Redstone Arsenal and the Marshall Space Flight Center. Examples: Operation Paperclip and Werhner von Braun, Jupiter-C, Saturn V, Skylab
u788 1970s TO TODAY
u789 (x=41) 15 Trace the United States’ military involvement in international conflicts since 1980, including those following the September 11 attacks.
u790 (x=109) Examples: First and Second Gulf War, Global War on Terror
u791 [T2 R1 C1] 16 Research and report on Alabama’s economic contributions and participation in global markets from the mid-twentieth through twenty-first centuries. Examples: decline of textiles; growth of aerospace, automobile manufacturing, and aviation
u792 [T2 R2 C1] 17
u793 [T2 R2 C2] State and defend a position regarding the benefits and drawbacks of technological advancements in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. Examples: artificial intelligence, autonomous vehicles, cell phones, CT scans, Internet, robotics
u794 [T2 R3 C1] 18
u795 [T2 R3 C2] Identify political achievements and legislation nationally and within Alabama that have furthered the modern civil rights movement since 1970. Examples: Condoleezza Rice as first Black female Secretary of State and first female National Security Advisor, election of Barack Obama, election of female officeholders, federal recognition of the Poarch Band of Creek Indians, Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act securing equal pay for women, Wyatt Standards for individuals with mental illness or developmental disabilities
=== page 54 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u798 Grades 6-8
u799 Overview
u800 GRADES 6-8
u801 OVERVIEW
u802 Students in Grades 6-8 explore social studies content in greater depth than in elementary grades. Grade 6 offers the first year of the three-part secondary sequence studying United States history. Students explore how the United States of America was formed, including deeper study of the civic foundations of the country. In Grades 7 and 8, students complete the first two years of a three-year world history sequence that includes an introduction to key geographic principles and concepts.
u803 Within each course, connections are made between the key discipline of the course and the other relevant themes and disciplines reflected in the 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies. Connecting standards are indicated by icons that link the content knowledge of the primary standard with content knowledge of a related discipline or with Alabama-specific content. Connections with related disciplines are also color coded.
u804 ALABAMA CONNECTION: The map icon indicates a standard that focuses on Alabama content.
u805 CIVICS CONNECTION: The capitol dome icon identifies a standard that connects civics, government, or political science content with the key disciplinary focus of the course.
u806 ECONOMICS CONNECTION: The dollar sign indicates a standard that connects economics content with the key disciplinary focus of the course.
u807 GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION: The compass rose indicates a standard that connects geography content with the key disciplinary focus of the course.
u808 HISTORY CONNECTION: This circular icon representing the passage of time identifies a standard that connects history content with the key disciplinary focus of the course.
u809 Standards in each course are organized into topics. Each grade’s standards are preceded by a skills framework that aligns relevant skills with the disciplinary thinking practices reflective of the four key content areas of the 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies.
=== page 55 === [running header: Grade 6 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u813 (x=60) Making A New Nation: United States Beginnings and Civic Foundations
u815 Making a New Nation: United States Beginnings and Civic Foundations is an in-depth study of the formation of the United States and its civic foundations. Students investigate the fundamental values and principles of the events, philosophies, and individuals that shaped the United States of America. Incorporating colonization and the American Revolution, standards address the United States’ government, civic responsibilities, and individual rights and freedoms. Standards provide opportunities to apply civic knowledge to learning experiences that foster increased personal responsibility and civic engagement.
u816 Standards and the accompanying skills framework emphasize the development of critical thinking skills through analyzing historical documents, constructing and defending arguments, and engaging in problem-solving. Students are encouraged to explore historical topics through a civics lens and begin thinking like historians while studying key events, people, and ideas in this period of American history. Process skills serve as an important component of this course. Through both content and skills standards, students grasp the significance of learning history and gain a deeper understanding of civic engagement.
u817 Course Topics: 1. Colonization of North America 2. The American Revolution 3. Creating a Government 4. Foundations of American Government 5. Government in a New Nation
u818 LOOKING BACK, LOOKING AHEAD: Grades 3-5 presented the history of Alabama contextualized within United States history. Third grade provided a brief overview of Indigenous history, exploration, and colonization. Fourth grade introduced a historical study of the American Revolution, setting the framework for the government. These two grades provided an introduction to what will be studied in sixth grade.
u819 Seventh grade begins a three-year sequence of world history and geography. The American Revolution and the founding principles of the United States will be revisited in tenth grade, with a more in-depth study of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries in tenth and eleventh grades. Twelfth grade focuses on the political process, the functions of government, and the fundamentals of economics.
u820 SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u821 The two sets of skills outlined below help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in college, career, and civic life: disciplinary thinking skills and social studies practices. The development of disciplinary thinking is foundational to a successful, engaging experience in social studies education. The disciplines are color-coded to show their alignment with disciplinary connection standards.
u822 Each practice in the left column of the table below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they engage in disciplinary thinking in social studies?”
=== page 56 === [running header: Grade 6 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u826 [T1 R1 C2] ● Explain how the characteristics of places and regions are connected to human identities and cultures. ● Analyze how relationships between humans and environments extend or contract spatial patterns of settlement and movement. ● Explain how cultural patterns and economic decisions influence environments and the daily lives of people in both nearby and distant places.
u827 [T1 R2 C2] ● Explain how economic decisions affect the well-being of individuals and society. ● Identify the benefits and costs of making various personal decisions. ● Evaluate alternative approaches or solutions to economic issues in terms of benefits and costs for different groups and society as a whole.
u828 [T1 R3 C2] ● Classify a series of historical events and developments as examples of change and/or continuity. ● Use questions generated about individuals and groups to analyze why they and the developments they shaped are seen as historically significant. ● Analyze multiple factors that influenced the perspectives of people during different historical eras. ● Explain how and why people’s perspectives have changed over time.
u829 [T1 R4 C2] ● Explain the specific roles played by citizens (such as voters, jurors, taxpayers, members of the armed forces, petitioners, protesters, and officeholders). ● Examine the origins, purposes, and impact of constitutions, laws, and treaties. ● Describe the roles of political, civil, and economic organizations in shaping people’s lives. ● Explain the relevance of personal interests and perspectives, civic virtues, and democratic principles when people address issues and problems in government and civil society.
u830 The areas of disciplinary thinking and corresponding skills outlined above provide the tools for students to explore course content at a greater depth and establish a deeper understanding. In addition, the following social studies practices develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom.
u831 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
=== page 57 === [running header: Grade 6 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u835 [T1 R1 C2] ● Evaluate a source by distinguishing between fact and opinion. ● Gather relevant information from multiple sources, using the origin, authority, structure, context, and corroborative value of the sources to guide the selection. ● Evaluate the credibility of a source by determining its relevance and intended use. ● Identify evidence that draws information from multiple sources to support claims, noting evidentiary limitations. ● Develop claims and counterclaims and identify the strengths and limitations of both.
u836 [T1 R2 C2] ● Ask and answer questions about arguments. ● Critique arguments for credibility. ● Construct written arguments using claims and evidence from multiple sources, acknowledging the strengths and limitations of the arguments. ● Assess individual and collective capacities to take action to address local, regional, and national problems, taking into account a range of possible levers of power, strategies, and potential outcomes.
u837 (x=219) MAKING A NEW NATION:
u838 (x=113) UNITED STATES BEGINNINGS AND CIVIC FOUNDATIONS
u839 (x=227) CONTENT STANDARDS
u840 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8.
u841 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u842 COLONIZATION OF NORTH AMERICA
u844 Describe major Indigenous societies in North America prior to European contact.
u845 [T2 R1 C1] 1a Compare the political and social structures of Southeastern Woodland Indigenous peoples and those of another region of North America. Examples: California, Northeastern Woodlands, Great Plains, Northwest Plateau, Southwest
u846 [T2 R2 C1] 2
u847 [T2 R2 C2] Compare and contrast the reasons for British, French, and Spanish colonization in North America as well as why individuals migrated to the colonies, including mercantilism, religious persecution, poverty, oppression, and new opportunities. Examples: French Huguenots and the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, Jamestown and the Virginia Company, Jesuit missionaries and conversion, overpopulation and English colonization, silver mining and Spain’s economic growth
u848 [T2 R3 C1] 2a Summarize how the Crusades, Reformation, and Renaissance influenced European exploration and describe how individuals contributed to these movements. Examples: Johannes Gutenberg, John Calvin, Martin Luther, Prince Henry the Navigator
=== page 58 === [running header: Grade 6 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u852 [T1 R1 C1] 2b
u853 [T1 R1 C2] Trace the routes of key European expeditions in North America and describe their effects on colonization in the New World. Examples: expeditions - Francisco Vásquez de Coronado (Southwest), Henry Hudson (Northeast), Hernando de Soto (Southeast); effects - documenting new cultures and natural resources, establishing trade routes and outposts, mapping territories
u854 [T1 R2 C1] 2c
u855 [T1 R2 C2] Locate on a map of North America the areas of European colonization, including colonies of England, France, Russia, and Spain.
u856 [T1 R3 C1] 3
u857 [T1 R3 C2] Describe the effects of European expeditions and colonization on the economic, geographic, and social conditions of Indigenous peoples during the fifteenth through eighteenth centuries in North America. Examples: Columbian Exchange, disease, ecological disruption, fur trade
u858 [T1 R4 C1] 3a
u859 [T1 R4 C2] Summarize how interactions between colonists and Indigenous peoples resulted in both conflict and cooperation, including economic and military alliances. Examples: Indigenous slave trade, King Philip’s War, Pocahontas and John Smith, Powhatan War, Pueblo Revolt, Thanksgiving
u860 [T1 R5 C1] 4 Compare and contrast the key characteristics, including political structures, of the New England, Middle, Chesapeake, and Southern colonies. Examples: characteristics - Georgia as a buffer against Spanish Florida, Virginia and tobacco production; political structures - charter, proprietary, provincial (royal)
u861 [T1 R6 C1] 4a
u862 [T1 R6 C2] Explain how climate and geography shaped the economic identities of the colonial regions. Examples: plantation agriculture in Lower South, production of foodstuffs in Middle Colonies, rocky New England and shipping
u863 [T1 R7 C1] 4b
u864 [T1 R7 C2] Differentiate among the various forms of colonial governments and identify examples of self-government in the colonies, including the Mayflower Compact, New England town meetings, and the Virginia House of Burgesses.
u865 [T1 R8 C1] 4c
u866 [T1 R8 C2] Identify individuals in colonial America who sought change for their communities, and describe how their efforts led to shifts in society. Examples: Chief Powhatan (Wahunsenacawh), James Oglethorpe, Nathaniel Bacon
u867 [T1 R9 C1] 5 Explain how the desire for religious freedom served as a motivation for establishing colonies. Examples: John Winthrop and “A Model of Christian Charity,” Lord Baltimore (Cecil Calvert) and Maryland, Moravians, William Penn and Pennsylvania
u868 [T1 R10 C1] 5a Summarize efforts to limit religious freedom in the colonies. Examples: established churches, Maryland Toleration Act, Requerimiento, Rhode Island and religious exile, Salem Witch Trials
u869 [T1 R11 C1] 5b
u870 [T1 R11 C2] Describe the contributions of colonists in bringing about religious change in colonial society. Examples: Anne Hutchinson, Bartolomé de Las Casas, John Winthrop, Roger Williams
=== page 59 === [running header: Grade 6 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u874 [T1 R1 C1] 5c Explain the influence of the Great Awakening on colonial society, including how it shaped the political beliefs of colonists. Examples: emotion v. reason, George Whitefield, Jonathan Edwards, New Lights v. Old Lights, religious liberty, revivals
u875 [T1 R2 C1] 6
u876 [T1 R2 C2] Trace the economic and cultural interactions across continents and the colonies resulting from the triangular trade routes, including the forced migration of Africans through the transatlantic slave trade and experiences of the Middle Passage.
u877 [T1 R3 C1] 6a Compare and contrast the institution of slavery in different colonial regions. Examples: agricultural v. urban slavery, gang v. task system, rice v. sugar harvesting
u878 [T1 R4 C1] 6b Summarize the purpose of slave codes in colonial society and explain how they demonstrated that laws can be discriminatory and unfair.
u879 [T1 R5 C1] 6c Describe how enslaved people and abolitionists sought to oppose slavery in colonial America. Examples: Anthony Benezet, Benjamin Lay, Francisco Menéndez, Maroons, Olaudah Equiano, Stono Rebellion
u880 THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION
u882 Identify causes and events leading to the War for Independence, including salutary neglect, the Stamp Act, the Boston Massacre, the Boston Tea Party, the Intolerable Acts, Virginia Convention (1775), and the Declaration of Independence, and describe how these events escalated tension between the colonies and Great Britain.
u883 [T2 R1 C1] 7a Develop an argument defending the belief that the French and Indian War served as a defining event in the relationship between the American colonies and British government. Examples: Albany Plan of Union, British war debt, Proclamation of 1763, territorial gains and land speculation
u884 [T2 R2 C1] 7b
u885 [T2 R2 C2] Compare and contrast methods of colonial activism and protest against British policies, including boycotts, craftwork, letters, petitions, poems, public oration, and speeches. Examples: Committees of Correspondence and intercolonial coordination, Daughters of Liberty and boycotts, First Continental Congress and political declarations, Penelope Barker and the Edenton Tea Party, Sons of Liberty, tarring and feathering
u886 [T2 R3 C1] 7c
u887 [T2 R3 C2] Describe the positive and negative effects of taxation and trade on the economic livelihood of American colonies in the 1760s and 1770s and explain how this issue violated colonists’ expectations of representative government.
u888 [T2 R4 C1] 7d Summarize the arguments put forth by Patriots and Loyalists regarding the question of independence from Great Britain, and describe efforts to compromise. Examples: Olive Branch Petition, Samuel Seabury’s “Farmer’s Letters,” Thomas Paine’s Common Sense
=== page 60 === [running header: Grade 6 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u892 [T1 R1 C1] 7e
u893 [T1 R1 C2] Define the key principles contained in the Declaration of Independence, including inalienable rights, equality, and social contract, and explain how they have been presented in significant statements of belief throughout United States history to the present. Examples: Elizabeth Cady Stanton’s “Declaration of Sentiments,” Fredrick Douglass’s “What to the Slave is the Fourth of July?” speech, Abraham Lincoln’s “Gettysburg Address,” Martin Luther King Jr.’s “I Have a Dream” speech
u894 [T1 R2 C1] 8 Differentiate among the outcomes of major events and campaigns of the War for Independence, including the northern, middle, southern, and western theaters. Examples: northern theater - Lexington and Concord, Bunker Hill, Fort Ticonderoga, Saratoga; middle theater - New York, Trenton, Monmouth; southern theater - Kings Mountain, Cowpens, Yorktown; western theater - Gulf Coast Campaign, Siege of Vincennes
u895 [T1 R3 C1] 8a Explain how the War for Independence created hardship and required sacrifice by colonists on the home front as well as by soldiers. Examples: food and clothing shortages, smallpox, Valley Forge
u896 [T1 R4 C1] 8b Research and report on the contributions to victory in the War for Independence from women, Black Americans, and supporters from other countries. Examples: colonists - Crispus Attucks, Deborah Sampson, Haym Solomon, James Armistead Lafayette, Mercy Otis Warren, Peter Salem, Phillis Wheatley, Salem Poor, Sybil Ludington; supporters from other countries - Bernardo de Gálvez, Baron von Steuben, Johann de Kalb, Marquis de Lafayette
u897 [T1 R5 C1] 8c Explain the involvement of Indigenous peoples in the War for Independence and the effects of the war on Indigenous societies. Examples: Cherokee Nation, Joseph Brant, Molly Brant, Oneida Nation, Sullivan Expedition
u898 [T1 R6 C1] 8d Explain why Loyalists and other colonists sided with the British during the War for Independence and how Great Britain’s defeat and withdrawal impacted their lives. Examples: reasons - Dunmore’s Proclamation and freedom, economic connections; effects loss of property, founding of Sierra Leone, migration, neighbor v. neighbor violence
u899 [T1 R7 C1] 9 Summarize the reasons for the colonies’ victory in the War for Independence.
u900 9a Evaluate the political and military contributions to the American Revolution of Founding Fathers, including their efforts to mobilize support, develop military strategy, and conduct foreign diplomacy.
u901 Examples: Henry Knox and artillery, John Adams and negotiating peace, Robert Morris and financial contributions
u902 [T2 R1 C1] 9b
u903 [T2 R1 C2] Analyze how the Treaty of Paris of 1783 affected the development of the United States, including the establishment of its boundaries.
=== page 61 === [running header: Grade 6 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u907 [T1 R1 C1] CREATING A GOVERNMENT
u908 [T1 R2 C1] 10
u909 [T1 R2 C2] Explain how events and issues of the Critical Period (1783-1789) exposed limitations of the Articles of Confederation and contributed to calls for a stronger national government. Examples: debt, diplomatic difficulties with foreign powers, interstate conflicts over trade and taxation, Shay’s Rebellion
u910 [T1 R3 C1] 10a
u911 [T1 R3 C2] Compare and contrast the division of power among levels of government in unitary, federal, and confederate styles of governance.
u912 [T1 R4 C1] 10b
u913 [T1 R4 C2] Describe how the Northwest Land Ordinances of 1785 and 1787 established a foundation for future territorial growth of the United States and restricted the growth of slavery.
u914 [T1 R5 C1] 10c
u915 [T1 R5 C2] Identify innovative ideas for democratic governance and the expansion of citizen rights that were included in state constitutions during the Critical Period. Examples: New Hampshire (educational provisions), New Jersey and New York (separation of powers and right to assemble and petition), Pennsylvania (universal male suffrage), Vermont (abolition), Virginia and Massachusetts (bills of rights)
u916 [T1 R6 C1] 11
u917 [T1 R6 C2] Analyze how collaboration and compromise were employed to address key issues during the Constitutional Convention, including representation in Congress (Great Compromise and bicameral legislature), balance of power between national and state governments (establishment of the system of federalism), limiting government power (establishment of the three branches), and slavery (Three-Fifths Compromise).
u918 [T1 R7 C1] 11a
u919 [T1 R7 C2] Describe the role of Founding Fathers at the Constitutional Convention and explain how they contributed to the development of the Constitution. Examples: Benjamin Franklin and compromise, George Washington as presiding officer, Gouverneur Morris and authorship, James Madison and the Virginia Plan
u920 [T1 R8 C1] 11b
u921 [T1 R8 C2] Summarize the arguments favoring and opposing ratification of the Constitution of the United States. Examples: Anti-Federalists, Federalists, Federalist Papers, state conventions
u922 [T1 R9 C1] 11c
u923 [T1 R9 C2] Assess the arguments made by groups and individuals seeking greater inclusion and advancement of fundamental values in the late 1700s, including women and Black Americans, who were excluded from early American political participation. Examples: Abigail Adams, Absalom Jones, Judith Sargent Murray, Lemuel Haynes, Prince Hall
u924 [T2 R1 C1] FOUNDATIONS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT
u925 [T2 R2 C1] 12
u926 [T2 R2 C2] Explain how forms of governments established prior to the founding of the United States influenced the formation of the new nation’s system of government.
=== page 62 === [running header: Grade 6 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u930 [T1 R1 C1] 12a
u931 [T1 R1 C2] Describe how the Magna Carta, Petition of Right, and English Bill of Rights contributed to the development of limited government.
u932 [T1 R2 C1] 12b
u933 [T1 R2 C2] Compare and contrast how Enlightenment thinkers interpreted the purpose of government and the relationship between government and citizens. Examples: Adam Smith, Jean Jacques Rousseau, John Locke, Montesquieu, Thomas Hobbes, Voltaire
u934 [T1 R3 C1] 12c
u935 [T1 R3 C2] Develop an argument supporting the idea that the Iroquois Confederacy’s form of representative government influenced attempts of the colonies to unite as one nation.
u936 [T1 R4 C1] 13
u937 [T1 R4 C2] Describe major ideas, concepts, and limitations of the Constitution of the United States.
u938 [T1 R5 C1] 13a
u939 [T1 R5 C2] Explain how a written constitution aids in establishing limited government and the rule of law.
u940 [T1 R6 C1] 13b
u941 [T1 R6 C2] Describe how the authors of the Constitution viewed the primary functions of government, based on the wording of the Preamble.
u942 [T1 R7 C1] 13c
u943 [T1 R7 C2] Analyze key elements of the Constitution that deal with citizenship and civic participation, including the path to citizenship and the process for amending the Constitution.
u944 [T1 R8 C1] 14
u945 [T1 R8 C2] Outline the process of selecting political leaders of the United States as established in the Constitution and its amendments. Examples: Article III, congressional redistricting, Electoral College, Seventeenth Amendment, Twenty-Fifth Amendment
u946 [T1 R9 C1] 15
u947 [T1 R9 C2] Explain how the system of federalism in the United States divides power between national and state governments as well as between state and local governments.
u948 [T1 R10 C1] 15a
u949 [T1 R10 C2] Summarize how federalism balances concerns regarding limiting a powerful national government, securing regional interests, and sharing power across the United States.
u950 [T1 R11 C1] 16
u951 [T1 R11 C2] Compare duties and functions of the legislative, executive, and judicial branches at various levels of government. Examples: compare roles of president and governor, state courts and federal courts, state legislatures and city councils
u952 [T1 R12 C1] 16a
u953 [T1 R12 C2] Illustrate and explain the relationship among the three branches, including checks and balances and separation of powers.
u954 [T1 R13 C1] 16b
u955 [T1 R13 C2] Identify key positions in each branch and describe their responsibilities. Examples: Cabinet members, President, Speaker of the House, Supreme Court Justices
=== page 63 === [running header: Grade 6 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u959 [T1 R1 C1] 17
u960 [T1 R1 C2] Explain key rights included in the Bill of Rights and provide examples of how citizens exercise these rights in today’s society. Examples: freedom of speech, religion, and assembly; right to counsel
u961 [T1 R2 C1] 17a
u962 [T1 R2 C2] Trace the origins of rights contained in the Bill of Rights to issues leading to the American Revolution and the concerns of colonists about unlimited government power. Examples: Freedom of the press and the Zenger Trial, Third Amendment and the Quartering Acts, Fourth Amendment and writs of assistance, Sixth Amendment and vice-admiralty courts
u963 [T1 R3 C1] 17b
u964 [T1 R3 C2] Explain the significance of Marbury v. Madison (1803) in establishing judicial review by the Supreme Court.
u965 [T1 R4 C1] 17c
u966 [T1 R4 C2] Identify constitutional amendments that expanded political rights for citizens and describe the efforts of citizens to secure these rights. Examples: Reconstruction Amendments (Thirteenth, Fourteenth, Fifteenth), Seventeenth Amendment, Nineteenth Amendment, Twenty-Third Amendment, Twenty-Fourth Amendment, Twenty-Sixth Amendment
u967 [T1 R5 C1] 18
u968 [T1 R5 C2] Analyze how an individual’s civic participation can influence government, politics, and society.
u969 [T1 R6 C1] 18a
u970 [T1 R6 C2] Identify and describe ways citizens work together to influence the government and solve problems.
u971 [T1 R7 C1] 18b
u972 [T1 R7 C2] Differentiate between the requirements, responsibilities, and rights for citizenship in the United States. Examples: jury duty, participating in local government, paying taxes, voting
u973 [T1 R8 C1] 18c
u974 [T1 R8 C2] Explain how an individual becomes a citizen of the United States, including birthright citizenship and naturalization, and identify moments in history in which citizenship has been extended to individuals not previously considered citizens. Examples: Naturalization Act of 1790, Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, Fourteenth Amendment, United States v. Wong Kim Ark (1898), Indian Citizenship Act of 1924
u975 [T2 R1 C1] GOVERNMENT IN A NEW NATION
u976 [T2 R2 C1] 19
u977 [T2 R2 C2] Analyze the election and presidency of George Washington for its impact on establishing the role of president in the United States, including the creation of the first Cabinet, establishment of the District of Columbia, commitment to religious freedom (Letter to the Hebrew Congregation at Newport), and the two-term precedent.
u978 [T2 R3 C1] 19a Formulate and defend a position on the use of federal authority by Washington and his administration in response to the Whiskey Rebellion.
u979 [T2 R4 C1] 19b Summarize the views Washington expressed in his Farewell Address regarding political factions, international relations, and civic virtue.
=== page 64 === [running header: Grade 6 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u983 [T1 R1 C1] 20
u984 [T1 R1 C2] Trace the development of the Federalist and Democratic-Republican political parties in the 1790s, and describe the role of political parties in the American political system.
u985 [T1 R2 C1] 20a
u986 [T1 R2 C2] Describe Alexander Hamilton’s economic plan for the new United States and explain how this became the foundation of capitalism in the country.
u987 [T1 R3 C1] 20b
u988 [T1 R3 C2] Compare the arguments for and against the establishment of the National Bank as represented by differing interpretations of the Constitution.
u989 [T1 R4 C1] 20c
u990 [T1 R4 C2] Compare Alexander Hamilton’s vision for an industrial United States to Thomas Jefferson’s agricultural vision.
u991 [T1 R5 C1] 20d
u992 [T1 R5 C2] Describe the significance of the Election of 1800 as setting the precedent for a peaceful transition of power and the electoral reform the election produced. Examples: Aaron Burr, John Adams v. Thomas Jefferson, Twelfth Amendment
=== page 65 === [running header: Grade 7 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u996 (x=32) World History and Geography: Geographic Principles and Ancient Civilizations
u998 World History and Geography: Geographic Principles and Ancient Civilizations is the first course in a three-course world history and geography sequence comprised of the study of prehistory through the Roman Empire, with an emphasis on the development of Western civilization. This broad survey of ancient civilizations and cultures is viewed through a variety of disciplinary lenses, including civics and economics.
u999 Because geography encompasses the study of places and the relationships between people and their environments, studying geography increases students’ comprehension of global connections and helps them expand their knowledge and understanding of a wide variety of cultures. The analytical study of other cultures enables students to develop necessary skills to be knowledgeable, responsible, and engaged citizens, as well as providing a foundation for students to think critically about the forces that combined to shape the world today.
u1000 Course Topics: 1. Five Themes of Geography and Map Skills 2. Pre-History and the Neolithic Revolution 3. Ancient Civilizations in the Greater Mediterranean 4. Ancient Civilizations in the Americas and Africa 5. Ancient and Classical Civilizations in Asia 6. Classical Greece and Rome
u1001 LOOKING BACK, LOOKING AHEAD: Students in sixth grade began their study of United States history with a focus on civics and responsible citizenship, which created a foundation for further study of world and United States history through a civics lens. Seventh grade focuses on geography and the beginnings of human history, which will continue in eighth and ninth grades. Eighth grade students study the Fall of the Western Roman Empire to the Enlightenment. In ninth grade, students conclude this three-year sequence, studying the Age of Revolution to the present day.
u1002 SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u1003 The two sets of skills outlined below help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in college, career, and civic life: disciplinary thinking skills and social studies practices. The development of disciplinary thinking is foundational to a successful, engaging experience in social studies education. The disciplines are color-coded to show their alignment with disciplinary connection standards.
u1004 Each practice in the left column of the table below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they engage in disciplinary thinking in social studies?”
=== page 66 === [running header: Grade 7 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1008 [T1 R1 C2] ● Use maps, satellite images, photographs, and other representations to explain relationships between the locations of places and regions and changes in their environmental characteristics. ● Explain how cultural patterns and economic decisions influence environments and the daily lives of people in both nearby and distant places. ● Analyze the combinations of cultural and environmental characteristics that make places both similar to and different from other places. ● Analyze the ways in which cultural and environmental characteristics vary among various regions of the world. ● Analyze how relationships between humans and environments expand or contract spatial patterns of settlement and movement.
u1009 [T1 R2 C2] ● Explain factors which cause standards of living to increase and productivity to improve. ● Explain barriers to trade and how they influence trade among societies. ● Explain how changes in supply and demand cause changes in prices and quantities of goods, services, and labor. ● Analyze the role of innovation in a society.
u1010 [T1 R3 C2] ● Analyze connections among events and developments in broader historical contexts. ● Analyze multiple factors that influenced the perspectives of people during different historical eras. ● Use questions generated about multiple historical sources to identify further areas of inquiry and additional sources. ● Evaluate the relative influence of various causes of events and developments in the past. ● Organize applicable evidence into a coherent argument about the past.
u1011 [T1 R4 C2] ● Explain specific roles played by citizens in their respective societies. ● Assess specific rules and laws (both actual and proposed) as means of addressing public problems. ● Compare historical and contemporary means of changing societies and promoting the common good.
u1012 The areas of disciplinary thinking and corresponding skills outlined above provide the tools for students to explore course content at a greater depth and establish a deeper understanding. In addition, the following social studies practices develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom.
u1013 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
=== page 67 === [running header: Grade 7 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1017 [T1 R1 C2] ● Gather relevant information from multiple sources, using the origin, authority, structure, context, and corroborative value of the sources to guide the selection. ● Evaluate the credibility of a source by determining its relevance and intended use. ● Identify evidence that draws information from multiple sources to support claims, noting evidentiary limitations. ● Develop claims and counterclaims while pointing out the strengths and limitations of both.
u1018 [T1 R2 C2] ● Construct written arguments using claims and evidence from multiple sources and acknowledge the strengths and limitations of the arguments. ● Construct written explanations using reasoning, correct sequence, examples, and details with relevant information and data, and acknowledge the strengths and weaknesses of the explanations. ● Critique arguments for credibility.
u1019 (x=179) WORLD HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY:
u1020 (x=107) GEOGRAPHIC PRINCIPLES AND ANCIENT CIVILIZATIONS
u1021 (x=227) CONTENT STANDARDS
u1022 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8.
u1023 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u1024 [T2 R1 C1] FIVE THEMES OF GEOGRAPHY AND MAP SKILLS
u1025 [T2 R2 C1] 1
u1026 [T2 R2 C2] Describe the world in spatial terms, using maps and other geographic representations, tools, and geospatial technologies.
u1027 [T2 R3 C1] 1a
u1028 [T2 R3 C2] Explain and demonstrate the use of map essentials, including direction, distance, legend, latitude, longitude, map type, projection, scale, and symbols. Examples: conic, Gall-Peters, Mercator, Robinson map projections
u1029 [T2 R4 C1] 1b
u1030 [T2 R4 C2] Use physical, political, and special-purpose maps to identify the distribution of people, location of places, and classification of physical features.
u1031 [T2 R5 C1] 1c
u1032 [T2 R5 C2] Utilize maps to explain relationships among people and places, including governmental alliances, immigration patterns, and trade patterns.
=== page 68 === [running header: Grade 7 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1036 [T1 R1 C1] 1d
u1037 [T1 R1 C2] Describe how geographic features and political entities are organized and labeled, including continents, countries, and oceans.
u1038 [T1 R2 C1] 2
u1039 [T1 R2 C2] Analyze how human interaction with the environment, location, movement, place, and region affect cultural, economic, and social conditions for those living in a geographic area.
u1040 [T2 R1 C1] PRE-HISTORY AND THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION
u1041 [T2 R2 C1] 3 Analyze how historians organize human history and events, including the use of calendars. Examples: Gregorian calendar, Julian calendar, Mayan calendar
u1042 [T2 R3 C1] 3a Describe multiple methods for organizing and labeling periods of time, including differentiating between the BC/AD and BCE/CE notations. Examples: century, circa, decade, Industrial Age, Neolithic era
u1043 [T2 R4 C1] 4 Explain how artifacts and other archaeological findings provide evidence of the nature and movement of prehistoric groups of people. Examples: Göbekli Tepe, Lascaux cave paintings, Lucy, Ötzi the Iceman, Stonehenge
u1044 [T2 R5 C1] 4a Differentiate among primary, secondary, and tertiary sources in how they are used to study both history and geography. Examples: primary - artifacts, fossils, photographs, written accounts; secondary - biographies, written critiques; tertiary - atlases, encyclopedias, guidebooks
u1045 [T2 R6 C1] 4b
u1046 [T2 R6 C2] Use maps to identify how climate and weather patterns, including the Ice Ages, affect the ways humans adapt within different geographic locations.
u1047 [T2 R7 C1] 4c
u1048 [T2 R7 C2] Predict causes and consequences of human migration, including push and pull factors.
u1049 [T2 R8 C1] 5 Explain common patterns that emerged in the shift from hunter-gatherer societies to permanent settlements in different regions of the world, including types and sizes of settlements.
u1050 [T2 R9 C1] 5a
u1051 [T2 R9 C2] Analyze the influence of physical geography on the locations of the early agrarian societies, including the early river valleys settlements. Examples: Huang He River, Indus River, Nile River, Tigris and Euphrates Rivers
u1052 [T2 R10 C1] 5b Describe the settlement patterns, shift in gender roles, and job specialization associated with the development of agrarian societies.
u1053 [T2 R11 C1] 5c Describe the agricultural innovations that developed as a result of the Neolithic Revolution, including the domestication of plants and animals.
=== page 69 === [running header: Grade 7 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1057 ANCIENT CIVILIZATIONS IN THE GREATER MEDITERRANEAN
u1059 Explain how technological innovations and the geographic features of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers contributed to the development of civilization in the Fertile Crescent.
u1060 [T1 R1 C1] 6a
u1061 [T1 R1 C2] Describe how agriculture, domestication of animals, inventions, irrigation, metalsmithing, and mining contributed to the settlement and growth of Mesopotamian civilizations. Examples: the plow, the sail, the wheel
u1062 6b Analyze how advancements in agriculture in Sumer led to economic growth, expansion of trade and transportation, and the emergence of independent city-states.
u1063 [T2 R1 C1] 6c
u1064 [T2 R1 C2] Summarize the cultural and political innovations of Mesopotamia, including The Epic of Gilgamesh and Hammurabi's Code.
u1066 Analyze the economic, political, and social structures of ancient Egypt.
u1067 [T3 R1 C1] 7a
u1068 [T3 R1 C2] Describe the role of the Nile River and Mediterranean Sea in supporting the economic and cultural growth of ancient Egypt.
u1069 7b Identify major technological and artistic achievements of ancient Egypt. Examples: calendar, engineering, hieroglyphics, mummification, pyramids, tomb of Tutankhamun
u1070 7c Summarize the social structure and religious beliefs of ancient Egypt.
u1071 7d Describe the achievement of key leaders of ancient Egypt and how these achievements helped grow the kingdom.
u1072 Examples: Amenhotep IV, Hatshepsut, Khufu, Nubian Dynasty, Ramses II
u1073 8 Explain the geographic and cultural development of ancient Israel.
u1074 8a Identify the central tenets of Judaism, and compare Judaism to the polytheistic religions of other Mediterranean ancient civilizations.
u1075 8b Describe the establishment of a unified Israel under Kings Saul, David, and Solomon.
u1076 [T4 R1 C1] 8c
u1077 [T4 R1 C2] Outline the multiple exiles of the Jewish people and their return to Israel, from the establishment of the nation through the Roman destruction of Jerusalem in 70 AD/CE. Examples: Assyrian Exile, Babylonian Captivity
u1078 ANCIENT CIVILIZATIONS IN THE AMERICAS AND AFRICA
u1079 Compare and contrast the economic and cultural structures of early African societies.
u1081 (x=109) Examples: regions - Khoesan, Niger-Congo, Nubia; kingdoms - Aksum, Carthage, Meroe
=== page 70 === [running header: Grade 7 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1085 [T1 R1 C1] 9a
u1086 [T1 R1 C2] Explain how physical geography, including natural resources, contributed to the economic and cultural practices of early African societies. Examples: impact of tsetse fly, Nile River, Nok society and terracotta pottery, pastoralism
u1087 9b Describe common tenets of indigenous religion practiced in Africa, including the beliefs of the Ashanti, Dogon, and Igbo religious traditions.
u1088 Examples: ancestor worship, animism, oral tradition, theism
u1089 [T2 R1 C1] 9c
u1090 [T2 R1 C2] Describe how trade, including silent barter, facilitated exchange of economic practices, language, and culture across Africa from prehistory through the Iron Age.
u1091 [T2 R2 C1] 10 Describe cultural and economic characteristics of early Indigenous peoples in North and South America, including civilizations in Mesoamerica, the Andes, and the Mississippi River Valley.
u1092 [T2 R3 C1] 10a
u1093 [T2 R3 C2] Identify locations and migration patterns of early Indigenous peoples on a map, including the Olmec and Woodland Period civilizations. Examples: Hopewell, Poverty Point, San Lorenzo Tenochtitlán
u1094 [T2 R4 C1] 10b
u1095 [T2 R4 C2] Compare and contrast the development of agriculture in the Americas with agricultural practices in other early civilizations. Examples: irrigation, swidden agriculture (slash-and-burn), terrace farming, three sisters farming
u1096 [T2 R5 C1] 10c Describe how religion, architecture, and politics intersected in early Indigenous civilizations, including the Maya civilization.
u1097 ANCIENT AND CLASSICAL CIVILIZATIONS IN ASIA
u1098 (x=41) 11 Trace the development and growth of societies in Southwest Asia, including the Assyrians, Phoenicians, and Persian Empire.
u1099 (x=109) Examples: emergence of Zoroastrianism, reign of Ashurbanipal, ruin and rebuilding of Babylon
u1100 [T3 R1 C1] 12 Analyze the development of civilization in South Asia from the settling of the Indus River Valley to the beginning of the Gupta Empire.
u1101 [T3 R2 C1] 12a Summarize how Hinduism as well as a caste system emerged from different religious beliefs and schools of philosophy.
u1102 [T3 R3 C1] 12b
u1103 [T3 R3 C2] Describe how geographic conditions in South Asia, including monsoons, and trade with neighboring regions contributed to the growth of civilization in the region.
u1104 [T3 R4 C1] 12c Trace the development of Buddhism, including the contributions of Emperor Ashoka, and explain how Buddhism influenced society in Classical India. Examples: Buddhist missionaries, construction of stupas
u1105 [T3 R5 C1] 13 Explain the emergence and consolidation of China from the Xia Dynasty along the Huang He River
=== page 71 === [running header: Grade 7 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1109 Valley through the fall of the Han Dynasty.
u1110 (x=45) 13a Compare and contrast the philosophies of Confucianism, Daoism, and Legalism and explain how they influenced dynastic cycles, politics, and society in China.
u1111 (x=109) Examples: Confucius and government morality, Han Fei and government realism, Mandate of Heaven (tianming)
u1112 (x=44) 13b Trace the reunification of China from the Warring States period and the Qin Dynasty which led to China’s Golden Age under the Han Dynasty.
u1113 (x=109) Examples: beginning of the Great Wall of China, introduction of new military technology, rise of Qin, technological improvements
u1114 13c Describe the significance of Chinese technological advancements, including paper, gunpowder, the compass, and the seismograph.
u1115 [T1 R1 C1] 13d
u1116 [T1 R1 C2] Analyze how the establishment of the Silk Road fostered economic and cultural development across multiple continents. Examples: cultural exchange, dissemination of religion, Mogao Caves, monopoly
u1117 [T2 R1 C1] CLASSICAL GREECE AND ROME
u1118 [T2 R2 C1] 14 Summarize cultural contributions and legacies of Classical Greece, including architecture, arts, intellectual life, literature, politics, and science. Examples: Doric and Ionic architecture; Greek epics and tragedies; Hippocrates and modern medicine; Olympics
u1119 [T2 R3 C1] 14a
u1120 [T2 R3 C2] Explain the development of the polis and analyze how geography affected the process, including Athens and Sparta.
u1121 [T2 R4 C1] 14b
u1122 [T2 R4 C2] Trace the development of Greek city-states' political systems, including democracy, that influenced the governments of modern nations. Examples: Cleisthenes’democratic reforms in Athens, Plato’s critique of democracy, statesmanship of Pericles
u1123 [T2 R5 C1] 14c Explain the influence of philosophers on Greek society, culture, and politics as well as their influence on modern thought. Examples: Aristotle, Plato, Socrates, Zeno
u1124 [T2 R6 C1] 14d Analyze the internal and external conflicts that played a role in Classical Greek society. Examples: Delian League, Peloponnesian League, Peloponnesian War, Persian Wars
u1125 [T2 R7 C1] 14e
u1126 [T2 R7 C2] Describe the influence of Alexander the Great’s empire, including the establishment of Hellenistic kingdoms, the diffusion of Greek culture, and its role in shaping Rome.
u1127 [T2 R8 C1] 15 Outline the key geographic, political, economic, and cultural elements of the Roman Republic. Examples: Conflict of the Orders/Plebeian Revolt, Roman architecture and engineering
=== page 72 === [running header: Grade 7 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1131 [T1 R1 C1] 15a
u1132 [T1 R1 C2] Trace the growth of the Roman Republic, using a variety of thematic and political maps. Examples: territorial expansion during Macedonian Wars, Punic Wars, and Pyrrhic War
u1133 [T1 R2 C1] 15b
u1134 [T1 R2 C2] Explain the social and cultural outcomes of economic activities within the Mediterranean region, including the establishment of colonies that influenced each other culturally.
u1135 [T1 R3 C1] 15c Analyze the social, political, and economic effects of the Punic Wars. Examples: Cato the Elder’s political philosophies, Hannibal Barca’s military strategies
u1136 [T1 R4 C1] 15d
u1137 [T1 R4 C2] Summarize the influence of Roman legal and political systems on later societies. Example: Latin terminology, Roman Senate, Roman Republic, Twelve Tables
u1138 [T1 R5 C1] 15e Describe the internal and external factors that led to the eventual collapse of the Roman Republic. Examples: “bread and circuses,” political reforms of the Gracchi brothers, slave revolts
u1139 [T1 R6 C1] 16 Trace the development of the Roman Empire, including the actions of Julius Caesar and the reigns of Augustus Caesar and the Five Good Emperors.
u1140 [T1 R7 C1] 16a
u1141 [T1 R7 C2] Explain Rome’s shift from Republic to Empire, including economic, political, and geographic causes. Examples: latifundia, law of nations, rule of law
u1142 [T1 R8 C1] 16b Describe the founding and development of Christianity, including the roles of Jesus of Nazareth and Paul of Tarsus, and how its spread was directly and indirectly influenced by the Roman Empire. Examples: Emperor Constantine, Roman roads, Seven Churches of Asia
u1143 [T1 R9 C1] 16c Summarize the economic, political, and social factors that led to the split and eventual fall of the Western Roman Empire. Examples: Diocletian’s Tetrarchy, invasions by external groups, Odoacer’s coup
=== page 73 === [running header: Grade 8 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1147 (x=80) World History and Geography: Middle Ages to the Enlightenment
u1149 World History and Geography: Middle Ages to the Enlightenment continues the world history and geography sequence with study of the period from the fall of the Western Roman Empire to the Enlightenment. This course focuses on the study of the early modern world through a variety of disciplinary lenses, including civics and economics, with an emphasis on the development of Western civilization. Geographic concepts embedded in the course seek to increase students’ understanding of global interconnectedness.
u1150 Because geography encompasses both the study of places and the relationships between people and their environments, studying geography increases students’ comprehension of global connections and helps them expand their knowledge and understanding of a wide variety of cultures. The analytical study of the various people, events, ideas, and innovations within this period enables students to develop necessary skills to be knowledgeable, responsible, and engaged citizens and to reflect critically on the forces that shape the modern world.
u1151 Course Topics: 1. Effects of the Fall of Rome 2. Medieval Societies 3. Renaissance and Reformation 4. Age of Exploration and Colonization in the Americas 5. Rise of Absolutism 6. Enlightenment and the Scientific Revolution
u1152 LOOKING BACK, LOOKING AHEAD: Seventh grade inaugurated the study of world history and geography from prehistory to the Roman Empire. Content in eighth grade is designed to help students build a deeper knowledge of Indigenous history as well as the history of North American exploration and settlement that was introduced in third grade. The three-part world history and geography sequence will conclude in ninth grade with the period from the Age of Revolution to the present day. This eighth grade study of exploration and colonization provides a foundation for tenth grade United States history.
u1153 SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u1154 The two sets of skills outlined below help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in college, career, and civic life: disciplinary thinking skills and social studies practices. The development of disciplinary thinking is foundational to a successful, engaging experience in social studies education. The disciplines are color-coded to show their alignment with disciplinary connection standards.
u1155 Each practice in the left column of the table below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they engage in disciplinary thinking in social studies?”
=== page 74 === [running header: Grade 8 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1159 [T1 R1 C2] ● Use maps, satellite images, photographs, and other representations to explain relationships between the locations of places and regions, and changes in their environmental characteristics. ● Explain how cultural patterns and economic decisions influence environments and the daily lives of people in both nearby and distant places. ● Analyze the combinations of cultural and environmental characteristics that make places both similar to and different from other places. ● Analyze the ways in which cultural and environmental characteristics vary among regions of the world. ● Explain how the characteristics of places and regions are connected to human identities and culture.
u1160 [T1 R2 C2] ● Explain why standards of living increase and productivity improves. ● Explain barriers to trade and how those barriers influence trade among societies. ● Explain how external benefits and costs influence market outcomes.
u1161 [T1 R3 C2] ● Analyze connections among events and developments in broader historical contexts. ● Analyze multiple factors that influenced the perspectives of people during different historical eras. ● Use questions generated about multiple historical sources to identify further areas of inquiry and additional sources. ● Evaluate the relative influence of various causes of events and developments in the past. ● Organize applicable evidence into a coherent argument about the past.
u1162 [T1 R4 C2] ● Explain specific roles played by citizens in their respective societies. ● Examine the origins, purposes, and impact of constitutions, laws, treaties, and international agreements. ● Assess specific rules and laws as means of addressing public problems. ● Compare historical and contemporary means of changing societies and promoting the common good.
u1163 The areas of disciplinary thinking and corresponding skills outlined above provide the tools for students to explore course content at a greater depth and establish a deeper understanding. In addition, the following social studies practices develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom.
u1164 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
=== page 75 === [running header: Grade 8 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1168 [T1 R1 C2] ● Gather relevant information from multiple sources, using the origin, authority, structure, context, and corroborative value of the sources to guide the selection. ● Evaluate the credibility of a source by determining its relevance and intended use. ● Identify evidence that draws information from multiple sources to support claims, noting evidentiary limitations. ● Develop claims and counterclaims while pointing out the strengths and limitations of both.
u1169 [T1 R2 C2] ● Construct written arguments using claims and evidence from multiple sources, while acknowledging the strengths and limitations of the arguments. ● Construct written explanations using reasoning, correct sequence, examples, and details with relevant information and data, while acknowledging the strengths and weaknesses of the explanations. ● Critique arguments for credibility.
u1170 WORLD HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY: MIDDLE AGES TO AGE OF REVOLUTION
u1171 (x=227) CONTENT STANDARDS
u1172 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8.
u1173 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u1174 EFFECTS OF THE FALL OF ROME
u1176 Analyze the economic, political, and social consequences of the collapse of the Western Roman Empire.
u1177 [T2 R1 C1] 1a
u1178 [T2 R1 C2] Trace the spread of Christianity in Europe and the wider Mediterranean region and outline the organizational structure of the early Catholic Church, including the roles of the Bishop of Rome and Councils of Carthage. Examples: influence of Saint Patrick and Saint Benedict on Europe, monastic schools, Saint Anthony of Egypt, Scholasticism
u1179 [T2 R2 C1] 1b
u1180 [T2 R2 C2] Explain the rise of Germanic kingdoms, the migration of their peoples, and the effect on political boundaries in Europe. Examples: Clovis I and the Franks, Theodoric the Great, Visigoths
u1181 [T2 R3 C1] 2 Describe the Byzantine Empire, its institutions, and its legacy. Examples: Constantinople, contributions of Emperor Justinian and Empress Theodora
=== page 76 === [running header: Grade 8 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1185 2a Identify factors leading to the separation of Eastern Orthodoxy and Western Christianity and explain how the Orthodox Church influenced society and culture in Eastern Europe and Central Asia.
u1186 Examples: Filioque clause and the Holy Spirit, Great Schism (1054 CE), iconoclasm, spread to Russia
u1187 2b Evaluate the cultural contributions of the Byzantines to art, religion, and architecture. Examples: Cyrillic alphabet, Hagia Sophia, mosaics, preservation of ancient manuscripts
u1188 [T1 R1 C1] 2c
u1189 [T1 R1 C2] Analyze the influence of the Code of Justinian on modern legal codes.
u1190 [T2 R1 C1] MEDIEVAL SOCIETIES
u1191 [T2 R2 C1] 3
u1192 [T2 R2 C2] Trace and analyze the spread of Islam through the Mediterranean region under the caliphs from 632 to 1258, including the consolidation of the Qur’an. Examples: defeat of the Byzantine and Sasanian empires, Abbasid Caliphate and Islamic Golden Age, Umayyad Caliphate’s expansion toward India and Spain
u1193 [T2 R3 C1] 3a Outline the founding and development of Islam under Muhammad. Examples: Five Pillars of Islam, importance of Mecca and Medina, the Qur’an
u1194 [T2 R4 C1] 3b Differentiate among the Islamic sects that developed after the death of Muhammad. Examples: Kharijites, Shi’ites, Sufism, Sunnis
u1195 [T2 R5 C1] 3c
u1196 [T2 R5 C2] Analyze the influence of Islamic cultural, economic, and political systems in Africa, Arabia, and Europe. Examples: architecture, development of algebra, expansion of trade in the Mediterranean region, popularity of poetry, translation of ancient texts
u1197 [T2 R6 C1] 4 Compare and contrast the cultural, economic, geographic, and political structures of the civilizations of medieval Asia, including China, India, Japan, and Korea.
u1198 [T2 R7 C1] 4a Explain China’s influence on other civilizations in Asia. Examples: Prince Shotoku’s adoption of Chinese practices, travels of Zheng He
u1199 [T2 R8 C1] 4b Describe how the Mongols influenced the cultural, economic, and social landscape of Asia. Examples: conquests of Genghis Khan, improvements to the Silk Road, Kublai Khan’s establishment of the Yuan Dynasty, Pax Mongolica
u1200 [T2 R9 C1] 4c Analyze the evolution of religion in Asia, including the growth of Buddhism, Hinduism, Jainism, and Sikhism. Examples: Bhakti movement; Delhi Sultanate and spread of Islam; intertwining of Buddhism and Shintoism (shinbutsu shūgō); Khmer Empire and spread of Hindu, Buddhist, and Shiva-Buddha traditions and their fusion with indigenous traditions
=== page 77 === [running header: Grade 8 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1204 [T1 R1 C1] 4d Trace the development of the feudal structure of medieval Japan, including the establishment of the Shogunate by Minamoto no Yoritomo. Examples: samurai culture, social stratification
u1205 [T1 R2 C1] 5 Compare the African kingdoms of Ghana, Mali, and Songhai, including cultures, economic systems, geography, religions, and slave trade.
u1206 [T1 R3 C1] 5a
u1207 [T1 R3 C2] Describe how physical geography shaped the growth of medieval African kingdoms and trade with neighboring regions. Examples: Great Zimbabwe and cattle, Mediterranean Sea and slave trade, Niger River and rise of Songhai, Swahili Coast and luxury goods trade with Asia
u1208 [T1 R4 C1] 5b Trace the spread of culture, language, and religion among African civilizations. Examples: Ethiopia and Christianity, role of griots, trade with North Africa and spread of Islam and literacy
u1209 [T1 R5 C1] 5c
u1210 [T1 R5 C2] Evaluate the economic and cultural contributions of key leaders and trade centers in African kingdoms, including Mansa Musa and the city of Timbuktu.
u1211 [T1 R6 C1] 6 Describe key aspects and figures of Indigenous societies during the Postclassic Period in Mesoamerica and the Andean region and the Mississippian Period in North America, including the Maya, Aztec, and Inca civilizations. Examples: Atahualpa, Cahokia, Montezuma II, Moundville, Pacal
u1212 [T1 R7 C1] 6a
u1213 [T1 R7 C2] Analyze how geographic and environmental factors led to the location and growth of Indigenous societies. Examples: Incan road system, Lake Texcoco and Tenochtitlan, cliff dwellings
u1214 [T1 R8 C1] 6b
u1215 [T1 R8 C2] Describe technological and engineering achievements of Indigenous societies. Examples: irrigation, Mayan Calendar, Mesoamerican Codices
u1216 [T1 R9 C1] 6c Explain how religious beliefs and practices shaped culture in Indigenous societies.
u1217 [T1 R10 C1] 7 Outline the social, cultural, economic, and religious developments of early medieval Europe.
u1218 [T1 R11 C1] 7a Compare and contrast the growth of medieval societies in different geographic regions of Europe. Examples: Mediterranean, Northern Europe, the early Russian state, Viking societies in Scandinavia
u1219 [T1 R12 C1] 7b Analyze the relationship of the Catholic Church to economic, political, and social systems and rulers in medieval Europe. Examples: King Henry IV, Pope Gregory VII, Pope Innocent III
u1220 [T1 R13 C1] 7c Explain the significant economic, political, and social aspects of European feudalism.
u1221 [T1 R14 C1] 7d Analyze the effects of political events in Europe during the Middle Ages, including the coronation of Charlemagne, the Norman Conquest, and the Hundred Years’ War.
=== page 78 === [running header: Grade 8 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1225 [T1 R1 C1] 7e
u1226 [T1 R1 C2] Summarize the significance of the issuing of the Magna Carta in limiting royal power and establishing the rule of law.
u1228 Analyze the social, political, and economic changes leading up to the Renaissance and Reformation in later medieval Europe and surrounding regions.
u1229 [T2 R1 C1] 8a Explain the political and cultural consequences of the Crusades, the Reconquista, the Spanish Inquisition, and the establishment of the Ottoman Empire. Examples: antisemitism, collapse of the Byzantine Empire, rise of the Christian kingdoms on the Iberian Peninsula, solidification of the Spanish kingdom
u1230 [T2 R2 C1] 8b
u1231 [T2 R2 C2] Trace the spread of the bubonic plague from Asia to Europe and describe the resulting changes that occurred in Europe, including the rise of the middle class.
u1232 [T2 R3 C1] 8c Describe the role of women in society and politics in medieval Europe, citing the contributions of significant women of the time. Examples: Christine de Pizan, Eleanor of Aquitaine, Joan of Arc, Queen Isabella of Spain, Saint Hildegard of Bingen
u1233 RENAISSANCE AND REFORMATION
u1234 9 Describe cultural and economic developments in Italy and Northern Europe during the Renaissance, including the influence of the Medici family.
u1235 9a Analyze humanism and the contributions of philosophers and artists during the Renaissance. Examples: Erasmus, Leonardo da Vinci, Michaelangelo, Niccolo Machiavelli, Petrarch, Plautilla Nelli
u1236 9b Summarize major scientific and technological advancements in the Renaissance, including the printing press, and evaluate their effects on society.
u1237 Examples: Hans Lippershey and the telescope, Zacharias Janssen and the microscope
u1238 10 Analyze the factors that contributed to the Reformation and explain how it affected the religious and political unity of Europe.
u1239 (x=45) 10a Summarize the policies and practices within the Roman Catholic Church that led to conflict with both religious reformers and secular authorities.
u1240 (x=109) Examples: indulgences, Latin Bible and Mass, simony, Western Schism and conciliarism
u1241 (x=44) 10b Describe the political, religious, and social contributions of reformers in Europe, including Martin Luther and John Calvin.
u1242 (x=109) Examples: Jan Hus and the Bohemian Revolution, John Wyclif and translations of the Bible
u1243 (x=45) 10c Summarize responses to the Reformation, including the Counter-Reformation, English Reformation, and religious conflicts, and cite the roles of central figures in these events.
u1244 (x=109) Examples: Erasmus, King Henry VIII, Queen Elizabeth I, Sir Thomas More, Teresa of Ávila
=== page 79 === [running header: Grade 8 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1248 AGE OF EXPLORATION AND COLONIZATION IN THE AMERICAS
u1249 11 Explain the motivations for exploration by European nations.
u1250 [T1 R1 C1] 11a
u1251 [T1 R1 C2] Summarize how expanding knowledge of geographical features and the development of navigational technology contributed to global exploration by Europeans. Examples: astrolabe, caravel, magnetic compass, patronage of Henry the Navigator, voyages of Bartolomeu Dias and Vasco de Gama
u1252 [T1 R2 C1] 11b Explain the economic, political, and religious factors that fostered exploration, including mercantilism.
u1253 [T1 R3 C1] 11c Analyze the consequences of initial contact between Europeans and Indigenous peoples in the Americas. Examples: Chief Tuskaloosa, Christopher Columbus, Francisco Pizarro, Hernán Cortés, Hernando de Soto, Malinche, Taino
u1254 [T1 R4 C1] 11d
u1255 [T1 R4 C2] Describe the Columbian Exchange and its contributions to cultural, demographic, economic, and environmental changes around the globe.
u1256 [T1 R5 C1] 12 Trace the cultural, economic, and political effects of European colonization on the populations of Africa, the Americas, and Europe.
u1257 [T1 R6 C1] 12a Explain how the desire for cheap labor led to the enslavement and decline of the Indigenous populations in the Americas. Examples: encomienda system, disease, repartimiento system, silver mining, Yamasee War
u1258 [T1 R7 C1] 13 Analyze the economic, political, and social effects of the transatlantic slave trade on African societies and American colonies. Examples: development of new culture, increased warfare, plantation system, population decline, trade patterns
u1259 [T1 R8 C1] 13a Describe the conditions and treatment of enslaved Africans during the Middle Passage and in the Americas.
u1260 RISE OF ABSOLUTISM
u1261 14 Summarize the rise of absolutism and explain how absolute monarchy differed from governing practices in Europe before the seventeenth century.
u1262 14a Explain how the Thirty Years’ War and the Peace of Westphalia led to the rise of absolutism.
u1263 (x=44) 14b Analyze the rise of absolutism in France under Louis XIV, including the divine right of kings.
u1264 (x=109) Examples: construction of the Palace of Versailles, revocation of Edict of Nantes
u1265 14c Describe how the development of absolutism affected governments in Russia and Prussia under the reigns of Peter the Great, Frederick the Great, and Catherine the Great.
=== page 80 === [running header: Grade 8 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1269 [T1 R1 C1] 14d Summarize the influence of the Ottoman Empire on the political landscape of European monarchies. Examples: Suleiman and conquest of central Europe, beginning conflicts with Russia
u1270 [T1 R2 C1] 15
u1271 [T1 R2 C2] Analyze the development of parliamentary and constitutional government in England. Examples: English Civil War, Glorious Revolution, Act of Union (1707)
u1272 [T1 R3 C1] 15a
u1273 [T1 R3 C2] Compare and contrast the political philosophies of Thomas Hobbes and John Locke.
u1274 [T1 R4 C1] 15b
u1275 [T1 R4 C2] Summarize how major provisions in the Petition of Right and the English Bill of Rights influenced early forms of constitutional government.
u1276 [T1 R5 C1] 16 Describe the governing policies in East Asia during the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries, including those of China and Japan.
u1277 [T1 R6 C1] 16a Trace the rise of militarism in Japan and explain how it led to the invasion of Korea. Examples: introduction of Portuguese firearms, desire for East Asian empire, Oda Nobunaga and unification of Japan
u1278 [T1 R7 C1] 16b Explain the effects of religion on Japanese society and politics. Examples: acceptance and suppression of Christianity, emergence of Confucian Shinto, influence of Zen Buddhism
u1279 [T1 R8 C1] 16c Compare the policies of absolutism and social structures of the Tokugawa Shogunate in Japan to European monarchies. Examples: daimyo, feudalism, isolation policy (sakoku)
u1280 [T1 R9 C1] 16d Describe how political changes in China led to the decline of imperial power from the Ming Dynasty to the end of the Qing Dynasty. Examples: Manchu invasion, natural disasters, peasant revolts, Seven Grievances
u1281 ENLIGHTENMENT AND THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION
u1282 17 Analyze the influence of the Scientific Revolution on European religion and society, including the astronomical theories of Nicolaus Copernicus and Galileo Galilei.
u1283 17a Explain the significance of the development of the scientific method and its implications for new discoveries and ideas.
u1284 [T2 R1 C1] 18
u1285 [T2 R1 C2] Summarize the main ideas of the Enlightenment and describe their emergence in European society.
u1286 [T2 R2 C1] 18a
u1287 [T2 R2 C2] Trace the origins of Enlightenment ideas to earlier eras and movements, including Classical Greece and Rome, Christianity, the Renaissance, the Reformation, and the Scientific Revolution.
=== page 81 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1290 Grades 9-12
u1291 Overview
u1292 GRADES 9-12
u1293 OVERVIEW
u1294 Students in Grades 9 through 11 continue the sequences of world and United States history begun in the middle grades. Grade 9 offers the final year of the three-part secondary sequence studying world history and geography. In Grades 10 and 11, students complete the final two years of the three-year United States history sequence that began in Grade 6. In Grade 12, students complete two half-credit courses that provide introductions to United States government and economics, including micro- and macroeconomics principles. Several elective courses are provided for additional study in social studies disciplines (Psychology, Sociology, Contemporary World Issues, Human Geography, Historical Studies, Holocaust Studies, and Alabama Studies). Standards for these optional high school courses follow the Grade 12 courses.
u1295 Within each course, connections are made between the key discipline of the course and the other relevant themes and disciplines reflected in the 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies. Connecting standards are indicated by icons that link the content knowledge of the primary standard with content knowledge of a related discipline or with Alabama-specific content. Connections with related disciplines are also color coded.
u1296 ALABAMA CONNECTION: The map icon indicates a standard that focuses on Alabama content.
u1297 CIVICS CONNECTION: The capitol dome icon identifies a standard that connects civics, government, or political science content with the key disciplinary focus of the course.
u1298 ECONOMICS CONNECTION: The dollar sign indicates a standard that connects economics content with the key disciplinary focus of the course.
u1299 GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION: The compass rose indicates a standard that connects geography content with the key disciplinary focus of the course.
u1300 HISTORY CONNECTION: This circular icon representing the passage of time identifies a standard that connects history content with the key disciplinary focus of the course.
u1301 Standards in each course are organized into topics. Each grade’s standards are preceded by a skills framework that aligns relevant skills with the disciplinary thinking practices reflective of the four key content areas of the 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies.
=== page 82 === [running header: Grade 9 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1305 (x=99) World History and Geography: Age of Revolution to Present
u1307 World History and Geography: Age of Revolution to Present is a one-credit course that concludes the three-course world history and geography sequence, covering the period from the Age of Revolution to the present day with an emphasis on Western civilization. It examines the Modern Era through a variety of disciplinary lenses, including civics and economics.
u1308 Geographic concepts are included to help students comprehend contemporary globalization. Because geography encompasses both the study of places and the relationships between people and their environments, learning about it increases students’ comprehension of global connections and helps them expand their knowledge and understanding of a wide variety of cultures. The analytical study of the various people, events, ideas, and developments that occurred during this period enables students to develop necessary skills to become informed, productive, and responsible citizens. This culminating course in the world history and geography sequence requires students to reflect on the past as a means of understanding the political, geographic, and economic systems that surround them.
u1309 Course Topics: 1. The Age of Revolution 2. Rise of Imperialism and World War I 3. Interwar Years and World War II 4. The Cold War Era 5. Globalization and the Modern World
u1310 LOOKING BACK, LOOKING AHEAD: In seventh and eighth grades, students began their study of world history and geography. Seventh grade standards covered prehistory to the Roman Empire; eighth grade standards covered the Fall of the Roman Empire to the Enlightenment. Students will study the history of the United States from pre-American Revolution to the present day in tenth and eleventh grades, which covers the same time period as the world history studied in ninth grade.
u1311 SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u1312 The two sets of skills outlined below help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in college, career, and civic life: disciplinary thinking skills and social studies practices. The development of disciplinary thinking is foundational to a successful, engaging experience in social studies education. The disciplines are color-coded to show their alignment with disciplinary connection standards.
u1313 Each practice in the left column of the table below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they engage in disciplinary thinking in social studies?
=== page 83 === [running header: Grade 9 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1317 [T1 R1 C2] ● Use maps, satellite images, photographs, and other representations to explain relationships between the locations of places and regions and their political, cultural, and economic dynamics. ● Use geographic data to analyze variations in the spatial patterns of cultural and environmental characteristics at multiple scales. ● Evaluate how political and economic decisions throughout time have influenced cultural and environmental characteristics of various places and regions. ● Evaluate the consequences of human-made and natural catastrophes for trade, politics, and human migration.
u1318 [T1 R2 C2] ● Analyze how incentives influence choices that may result in policies with a range of costs and benefits for different groups. ● Explain why advancements in technology and investments in capital goods and human capital increase economic growth and standards of living. ● Use benefits and costs to evaluate the effectiveness of government policies to improve market outcomes. ● Describe the possible consequences, both intended and unintended, of government policies intended to improve market outcomes.
u1319 [T1 R3 C2] ● Evaluate how historical events and developments were shaped by unique circumstances of time and place as well as broader historical contexts. ● Analyze complex and interacting factors that influenced the perspectives of people during different historical eras. ● Use questions generated about multiple historical sources to pursue further inquiry and investigate additional sources. ● Analyze multiple complex causes and effects of events in the past. ● Integrate evidence from multiple relevant historical sources and interpretations into a reasoned argument about the past.
u1320 [T1 R4 C2] ● Analyze the impact of constitutions, laws, treaties, and international agreements on the maintenance of national and international order. ● Critique relationships among governments, civil societies, and economic markets. ● Analyze the impact and the appropriate roles of personal interests and perspectives on the application of civic virtues, democratic principles, constitutional rights, and human rights. ● Analyze how people use and challenge local, state, national, and international laws to address a variety of public issues. ● Analyze historical, contemporary, and emerging means of changing societies, promoting the common good, and protecting rights.
u1321 The areas of disciplinary thinking and corresponding skills outlined above provide the tools for students to explore course content at a greater depth and establish a deeper understanding. In addition, the following social studies practices develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom.
u1322 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
=== page 84 === [running header: Grade 9 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1326 [T1 R1 C2] ● Gather relevant information from multiple sources representing a wide range of views, using the origin, authority, structure, context, and corroborative value of the sources to guide the selection. ● Evaluate the credibility of a source by examining how experts value the source. ● Identify evidence that draws information directly and substantively from multiple sources to detect inconsistencies in evidence in order to revise or strengthen claims. ● Refine claims and counterclaims, attending to the precision, significance, and knowledge they convey while pointing out the strengths and limitations of both.
u1327 [T1 R2 C2] ● Construct written arguments using precise and knowledgeable claims with evidence from multiple sources, while acknowledging counterclaims and evidentiary weaknesses. ● Construct written explanations using sound reasoning, correct sequence, examples, and details with significant and pertinent information and data, while acknowledging the strengths and weaknesses of the explanation, given its purpose. ● Critique claims and evidence in arguments for credibility. ● Use disciplinary and interdisciplinary lenses to understand the characteristics and causes of regional and global problems, instances of such problems in multiple contexts, and challenges and opportunities faced by those trying to address these problems over times and places.
u1328 WORLD HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY:
u1329 AGE OF REVOLUTION TO PRESENT
u1330 (x=227) CONTENT STANDARDS
u1331 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8.
u1332 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u1333 THE AGE OF REVOLUTION
u1335 Explain how the Enlightenment influenced societies and inspired revolutions in Europe and the Americas.
u1336 [T2 R1 C1] 1a
u1337 [T2 R1 C2] Compare and contrast the emerging ideas of Adam Smith, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, John Locke, Mary Wollstonecraft, Montesquieu, and Voltaire.
u1338 [T2 R2 C1] 1b
u1339 [T2 R2 C2] Summarize the influence of the Enlightenment on the American Revolution.
u1340 [T2 R3 C1] 2 Assess the causes and consequences of the French Revolution.
u1341 [T2 R4 C1] 2a
u1342 [T2 R4 C2] Explain how the American Revolution influenced the French Revolution. Examples: Declaration of Independence and Declaration of the Rights of Man, French veterans of the American Revolution, issue of war debt
u1343 [T2 R5 C1] 2b Identify the objectives of different factions in the French Revolution. Examples: émigrés, Girondins, Jacobins, monarchy, sans-culottes, the three Estates
=== page 85 === [running header: Grade 9 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1347 [T1 R1 C1] 2c Explain how the Reign of Terror affected the French Revolution, including Robespierre and the guillotine. Examples: anticlericalism, Committee of Public Safety, Law of 22 Prairial, Thermidorian Reaction, War of the First Coalition
u1348 [T1 R2 C1] 2d Describe the effects of the reign of Napoleon Bonaparte, the Napoleonic Wars, and the Congress of Vienna on the geography, politics, and society of Europe. Examples: Concert of Europe, Pax Britannica, suppression of revolutionary movements
u1349 [T1 R3 C1] 3 Explain the causes and outcomes of the revolutions of Latin America and the Caribbean. Examples: establishment of Gran Colombia, Haitian Revolution, Malê Revolt, Mexican War of Independence, Tacky’s Revolt
u1350 [T1 R4 C1] 3a
u1351 [T1 R4 C2] Identify the locations of colonial empires and post-revolutionary countries in Latin America and the Caribbean.
u1352 [T1 R5 C1] 3b Analyze the leadership of revolutionary leaders, including Simón Bolivar and Toussaint Louverture. Examples: Agustín de Iturbide, José de San Martin, Miguel Hidalgo, Tacky
u1353 [T1 R6 C1] 4 Explain how changes associated with the Industrial Revolution affected the economies, societies, and politics of Europe.
u1354 [T1 R7 C1] 4a
u1355 [T1 R7 C2] Describe the technological inventions and labor conditions that characterized the Industrial Revolution in Europe. Examples: coal power and steam engines, creation of labor unions, development of the factory system, low wages, poor safety, scientific research
u1356 [T1 R8 C1] 4b
u1357 [T1 R8 C2] Compare the theories of capitalism, utilitarianism, socialism, and Marxism, including the philosophies of John Stuart Mill, Karl Marx, and Robert Owen. Examples: anarchism, Christian socialism, The Communist Manifesto, David Ricardo and labor theory of value, Friedrich Engels, utopian socialism
u1358 [T1 R9 C1] 4c Describe the effects of urbanization on Europe during the nineteenth century, including the evolution of the middle and working classes. Examples: growth of the bourgeoisie, leisure, overcrowding, pollution, transportation improvements
u1359 RISE OF IMPERIALISM AND WORLD WAR I
u1360 Explain how nationalism fostered global transformation from 1848 to 1914.
u1362 5a Evaluate the influence of the Revolutions of 1848 on European politics and society. Examples: abolition of serfdom, liberal constitutions, Romanticism v. Realism, unification of Italy (Risorgimento)
=== page 86 === [running header: Grade 9 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1366 [T1 R1 C1] 5b Analyze how the international balance of power shifted as a result of the unification of Germany, the decline of the Ottoman Empire, and the emergence of international rivalries. Examples: Crimean War, Franco-Prussian War, Franco-Russian Alliance (1894)
u1367 [T1 R2 C1] 5c Analyze the rise of Japan’s power in East Asia beginning with the Meiji Restoration. Examples: Commodore Matthew Perry and Convention of Kanagawa, industrialization, military reforms, Russo-Japanese War
u1368 [T1 R3 C1] 6 Explain how imperialism fostered global transformation.
u1369 [T1 R4 C1] 6a Trace the origins of late nineteenth century imperialism, imperialist ideology, and colonialism. Examples: Berlin Conference, economic expansion, government paternalism, missionaries and religious conversion, nationalism, Social Darwinism
u1370 [T1 R5 C1] 6b Summarize how the actions of imperialist nations affected cultures and peoples of Africa and Asia, and explain how these peoples resisted imperialization. Examples: Anglo-Zulu War, Boxer Rebellion, First Italo-Ethiopian War, Indian Rebellion of 1857, Opium Wars, Taiping Rebellion
u1371 [T1 R6 C1] 6c
u1372 [T1 R6 C2] Identify Western nations’ spheres of influence in Africa, Asia, and Latin America that resulted from nineteenth and twentieth century imperialism.
u1373 [T1 R7 C1] 7 Explain causes and consequences of World War I, including imperialism, militarism, nationalism, and the alliance system.
u1374 [T1 R8 C1] 7a Assess the effects of trench warfare and new military technologies on combat during World War I. Examples: airplane, machine gun, mustard gas, shell shock, tanks, U-boats
u1375 [T1 R9 C1] 7b Describe the rise of the Bolsheviks and Soviet ideology in Russia during and after World War I. Examples: February and October Revolutions, Russian Civil War, Vladimir Lenin
u1376 [T1 R10 C1] 7c
u1377 [T1 R10 C2] Explain the consequences of the Treaty of Versailles of 1919, including political and boundary changes.
u1378 INTERWAR YEARS AND WORLD WAR II
u1380 Analyze the global cultural, economic, and political developments immediately following World War I.
u1381 [T2 R1 C1] 8a
u1382 [T2 R1 C2] Compare and contrast political ideologies that emerged in Europe following World War I, including communism, fascism, and social democracy.
u1383 8b Summarize the effects of the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire, including the rise of Arab nationalism and the European Mandate System.
u1384 Examples: Balfour Declaration of 1917, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and the founding of Türkiye, Sykes-Picot Agreement
=== page 87 === [running header: Grade 9 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1388 [T1 R1 C1] 9
u1389 [T1 R1 C2] Summarize the conditions of the global Great Depression and explain how they led to the rise of totalitarian states and the weakening of democratic nations.
u1390 [T1 R2 C1] 9a Describe how Joseph Stalin sought to consolidate his own rule and strengthen socialism in the Soviet Union from 1927 to 1939. Examples: collectivization, five-year plans, Great Purge, Holodomor
u1391 [T1 R3 C1] 9b Trace Adolf Hitler’s rise to power, describing Nazi ideology and the use of propaganda to advance his political and racial goals.
u1392 [T1 R4 C1] 9c Analyze the rise of militarism in Germany, Italy, and Japan in the 1930s and explain how it led to war.
u1393 [T1 R5 C1] 10 Evaluate the economic, global, political, and social consequences of World War II.
u1394 [T1 R6 C1] 10a Analyze the role of major Axis and Allied leaders during World War II, including both political and military leaders. Examples: Adolf Hitler, Benito Mussolini, Charles de Gaulle, Isoroku Yamamoto, Joseph Stalin, Winston Churchill
u1395 [T1 R7 C1] 10b
u1396 [T1 R7 C2] Describe major turning points of World War II in the European, North Africa, and Pacific theaters and identify the locations of these events. Examples: Nanjing Massacre, Battle of Stalingrad, Operation Torch, Battle of Guadalcanal, Operation Overlord, Battle of Iwo Jima
u1397 [T1 R8 C1] 10c Compare the experiences of civilians in different countries involved in conflict during World War II. Examples: Chinese civilians, collaborators, comfort women (ianfu), conscripted labor in Eastern Europe (Fremdarbeiter), Operation Pied Piper and child relocation, resistors
u1398 [T1 R9 C1] 11 Explain the Holocaust as the state-sponsored, systematic persecution and mass murder of Europe’s Jews and other minorities by Nazi Germany between 1933 and 1945.
u1399 [T1 R10 C1] 11a Describe how the Nazis built upon historical antisemitism to dehumanize Jewish people and frame them as the enemy of the German people.
u1400 [T1 R11 C1] 11b Trace how the Nazis’ plan for the European Jews evolved from 1933 to the Final Solution. Examples: economic boycotts, establishment of ghettos and camps, mobile killing squads (einsatzgruppen), November Pogroms (Kristallnacht), Nuremberg Laws, Wannsee Conference
u1401 [T1 R12 C1] 11c Explain the roles of different types of camps in the Holocaust, including slave labor, transit, concentration camps, and killing centers. Examples: concentration camps - Bergen-Belsen, Buchenwald, Dachau; forced-labor camps Dora-Mittelbau; killing centers - Auschwitz, Treblinka; transit camps - Drancy, Westerbork
u1402 [T1 R13 C1] 12 Trace the events that led to Victory in Europe (VE) Day, and explain how the use of atomic bombs ended the war in the Pacific Theater.
u1403 [T1 R14 C1] 12a Explain the origins, conduct, and outcomes of the Nuremberg Trials and Tokyo War Crimes Tribunal.
=== page 88 === [running header: Grade 9 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1407 THE COLD WAR ERA
u1408 (x=41) 13 Explain the origins of the Cold War as they relate to the economic, global, political, and social consequences of World War II.
u1409 (x=109) Examples: division of Germany, Greek Civil War, Potsdam Conference, Truman Doctrine
u1410 [T1 R1 C1] 13a Identify major international organizations and the spheres of influence that developed as the result of World War II and the emergence of Cold War hostilities, including North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), United Nations (UN), and Warsaw Pact. Examples: Central Treaty Organization (CENTO), Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), Rio Treaty, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO)
u1411 [T1 R2 C1] 13b
u1412 [T1 R2 C2] Compare political ideologies that existed within the United States, the Soviet Union, and People’s Republic of China after World War II. Examples: democracy and capitalism, Stalinism, Maoism
u1413 [T1 R3 C1] 13c Describe the development and conclusion of the Chinese Civil War, including the formation of Taiwan, and how the Chinese Communist Party sought to impose its vision under the rule of Mao Zedong. Examples: Anti-Rightist Campaign, Chiang Kai-Shek and Kuomintang, Cultural Revolution, Great Leap Forward
u1414 [T1 R4 C1] 14
u1415 [T1 R4 C2] Explain realignment and reconstruction in Europe, Asia, Africa, and Latin America after World War II, including the decline of colonial empires.
u1416 [T1 R5 C1] 14a Describe the efforts of people under colonial rule to establish their independence and resistance to these efforts, including the Zionist movement. Examples: Algerian War, David Ben-Gurion, Ho Chi Minh, Mahatma Gandhi, Mau Mau Rebellion, Suez Crisis
u1417 [T1 R6 C1] 14b
u1418 [T1 R6 C2] Analyze how economic aid expanded spheres of influence, including the Marshall Plan and Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON).
u1419 [T1 R7 C1] 15 Trace the progression of the Cold War from the end of World War II to the collapse of the Soviet Union.
u1420 [T1 R8 C1] 15a Explain the development of new technologies and their significance in the nuclear arms race and space race. Examples: military spending, NASA, nuclear proliferation, Sputnik, Tsar bomba
u1421 [T1 R9 C1] 15b Evaluate the extent to which efforts to contain or spread communism contributed to global conflict. Examples: Afghanistan, Angola, Argentina, Cuba, North and South Korea, Vietnam
u1422 [T1 R10 C1] 15c Describe the collapse of the Soviet Empire; Russia’s struggle for democracy, free markets, and economic recovery; and the roles of Mikhail Gorbachev, Ronald Reagan, and Boris Yeltsin in bringing the Cold War to a conclusion. Examples: Chernobyl, fall of the Berlin Wall, Glasnost and Perestroika, Solidarity Movement
=== page 89 === [running header: Grade 9 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1426 GLOBALIZATION AND THE MODERN WORLD
u1427 16 Analyze the causes and effects of both regional and internal conflicts in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries.
u1428 (x=45) 16a Critique the response of the world community to mass atrocities and violations of human rights and civil liberties in various nations and regions.
u1429 (x=109) Examples: Balkans, Cambodia, Darfur, Rwanda, Tiananmen Square
u1430 (x=44) 16b Trace the origin of the Arab-Israeli conflict following the establishment of the State of Israel and explain its impact on the global community.
u1431 (x=109) Examples: Lebanese Civil War, Munich Olympics, Six-Day War, Yom Kippur War
u1432 (x=45) 16c Evaluate the causes of terrorist movements from the 1970s into the 2000s, including the September 11 attacks, and government responses to them.
u1433 (x=109) Examples: broader Middle East region, Chechnya, Iran Hostage Crisis, Ireland, Peru
u1434 16d Assess the consequences of modern conflicts on populations, including famine, refugee crises, and the use of child soldiers.
u1435 (x=45) 16e Describe the influence of internal conflict, nationalism, and factional enmity in various nations and regions.
u1436 (x=109) Examples: Chile, the Middle East, Myanmar, Northern Ireland, Somalia, South Africa
u1437 [T1 R1 C1] 17
u1438 [T1 R1 C2] Analyze the effects of economic interdependence and globalization on places and their populations.
u1439 [T1 R2 C1] 17a
u1440 [T1 R2 C2] Explain motivations for countries to enter into global trade agreements. Examples: African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA), Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA), European Union (EU), the Mercado Común del Sur (MERCOSUR), Belt and Road Initiative (BRI)
u1441 [T1 R3 C1] 17b
u1442 [T1 R3 C2] Describe how economic challenges confronting least developed and developing countries impact their political system and society. Examples: North Korean famine (1994-1998), rise of Taliban after the Soviet-Afghan War, child labor and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
u1443 [T1 R4 C1] 18
u1444 [T1 R4 C2] Describe the interrelationship between people and the environment in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries.
u1445 [T1 R5 C1] 18a
u1446 [T1 R5 C2] Research major natural disasters and evaluate the effects of changes in weather, climate, and natural resource usage on regional identity. Examples: 1991 Bangladesh cyclone, 2003 European heatwave, 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, 2010 Haiti earthquake, 2011 Tōhoku earthquake
=== page 90 === [running header: Grade 9 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1450 [T1 R1 C1] 18b
u1451 [T1 R1 C2] Compare and contrast the current consumption of natural resources in various countries across the world. Examples: deforestation, fossil fuels, renewable energy resources
u1452 (x=45) 18c Explain problems and opportunities involving science, technology, and worldwide communication, including the Internet, in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries.
u1453 (x=109) Examples: artificial intelligence, creation of social media platforms, development of vaccines, digital privacy and security concerns, Human Genome Project, news media
=== page 91 === [running header: Grade 10 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1457 (x=121) United States History I: Revolution to Progressive Era
u1459 United States History I: Revolution to Progressive Era is a one-credit course that explores the ideological origins and key events of United States history from the American Revolution through the Progressive Era. The course traces the development and evolution of the United States through the nineteenth century and into the twentieth, illustrating the growth of the American nation and the challenges it faced as viewed from both national and Alabama perspectives.
u1460 The course emphasizes the skills needed to analyze this period of history. Students will develop critical thinking skills, analyze primary and secondary sources, and evaluate different historical perspectives. Content is designed to increase students’ understanding of how this period shaped the United States and their ability to connect historical events to current events.
u1461 Course Topics: 1. A New Nation 2. National Expansion and Reform 3. A Nation Divided 4. American Expansion Post-Civil War 5. The Development of Industrial America
u1462 LOOKING BACK, LOOKING AHEAD: In third, fourth, and fifth grades, students studied Alabama history within the context of United States history. Students in sixth grade completed an in-depth study of colonization and the American Revolution. Tenth grade builds upon these previous introductions to the time period of the American Revolution to the Progressive Era. This follows a three-year survey of world history and geography from seventh grade to ninth grade, which helped provide context for United States history. In eleventh grade, students will continue their study of United States history, focusing on the twentieth century and the early twenty-first century. Students will finish their high school social studies education in twelfth grade with an introduction to economics and the United States government.
u1463 SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u1464 The two sets of skills outlined below help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in college, career, and civic life: disciplinary thinking skills and social studies practices. The development of disciplinary thinking is foundational to a successful, engaging experience in social studies education. The disciplines are color-coded to show their alignment with disciplinary connection standards.
u1465 Each practice in the left column of the table below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they engage in disciplinary thinking in social studies?”
=== page 92 === [running header: Grade 10 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1469 [T1 R1 C2] ● Use maps, photographs, and other representations to explain relationships between the locations of places and regions and their political, cultural, and economic dynamics. ● Evaluate the impact of economic activities and political decisions on spatial patterns within and among urban, suburban, and rural regions. ● Evaluate how changes in the environmental and cultural characteristics of a place or region influence spatial patterns of trade and land use.
u1470 [T1 R2 C2] ● Analyze how incentives influence choices that may result in policies with a range of costs and benefits for different groups. ● Generate possible explanations for a government role in markets when market inefficiencies exist. ● Use benefits and costs to evaluate the effectiveness of government policies intended to improve market outcomes.
u1471 [T1 R3 C2] ● Explain how historical events and developments were shaped by unique circumstances of time and place as well as broader historical contexts. ● Analyze complex and interacting factors that influenced the perspectives of people during different historical eras. ● Explain how the perspectives of people in the present shape interpretations of the past. ● Analyze multiple causes and effects of events in the past.
u1472 [T1 R4 C2] ● Analyze the role of citizens in the United States political system, with attention to various theories of democracy and changes in Americans’ civic participation over time. ● Explain how the Constitution establishes a system of government that has powers, responsibilities, and limits that have changed over time and are still being contested. ● Evaluate policies in terms of intended and unintended outcomes and related consequences. ● Evaluate social and political systems, in different contexts, times, and places, that promote civic virtues and enact democratic principles.
u1473 The areas of disciplinary thinking and corresponding skills outlined above provide the tools for students to explore course content at a greater depth and establish a deeper understanding. In addition, the following social studies practices develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom.
u1474 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
=== page 93 === [running header: Grade 10 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1478 [T1 R1 C2] ● Gather relevant information from multiple sources representing a wide range of views, using the origin, authority, structure, context, and corroborative value of the sources to guide the selection. ● Evaluate the credibility of a source by examining how experts value the source. ● Identify evidence that draws information directly and substantively from multiple sources to detect inconsistencies in evidence in order to revise or strengthen claims. ● Refine claims and counterclaims, attending to the precision, significance, and knowledge they convey while pointing out the strengths and limitations of both.
u1479 [T1 R2 C2] ● Construct written arguments using precise and knowledgeable claims, with evidence from multiple sources, while acknowledging counterclaims and evidentiary weaknesses. ● Construct written explanations using sound reasoning, correct sequence (linear or non-linear), examples, and details with significant and pertinent information and data, while acknowledging the strengths and weaknesses of the explanation given its purpose (e.g. cause and effect, chronological, procedural, technical). ● Present arguments and explanations that feature ideas and perspectives on historical issues and topics to reach a range of audiences using print, oral, and digital technologies. ● Critique the use of claims and evidence in arguments for credibility and critique the use of reasoning, sequencing, and supporting details of explanations.
u1480 UNITED STATES HISTORY I: REVOLUTION TO PROGRESSIVE ERA
u1481 (x=227) CONTENT STANDARDS
u1482 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8.
u1483 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u1484 A NEW NATION
u1486 Trace the events from 1754 to 1783 that led to the independence of the United States of America.
u1487 1a Explain how British policies and actions from 1754 to 1775 created political and economic disagreements with American colonists.
u1488 Examples: French and Indian War, mercantilism, salutary neglect, taxation
u1489 1b Analyze the means by which colonists protested British policies and the ideas communicated through colonists’ speeches and written pamphlets.
u1490 Examples: homespun movement, Sons of Liberty, Thomas Paine’s Common Sense
u1491 [T2 R1 C1] 1c
u1492 [T2 R1 C2] Summarize the main arguments within the Declaration of Independence, its rationale for separation from Great Britain, and its ideas of equality, liberty, natural rights, and the rule of law.
=== page 94 === [running header: Grade 10 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1496 [T1 R1 C1] 1d Evaluate the contributions of colonial leaders, including George Washington; military strategy; and the support of foreign nations to significant victories in the War for Independence. Examples: Marquis de Lafayette and Yorktown, Nathanael Greene and Guilford Court House
u1497 [T1 R2 C1] 1e Compare and contrast the contributions of different groups in colonial America to the War for Independence and the effects of the war on members of these groups, including free and enslaved Black Americans, Loyalists, Native Americans, and women. Examples: Abigail Adams, Baron Von Steuben, Crispus Attucks, James Armistead Lafayette, Mary Ludwig Hays (“Molly Pitcher”), Oneida Nation
u1498 [T1 R3 C1] 2 Evaluate how events and issues from the signing of the Treaty of Paris (1783) to the ratification of the Constitution of the United States affected the development of the political system of the United States.
u1499 [T1 R4 C1] 2a Identify the strengths and weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation, and describe how Shays’ Rebellion generated sentiment favoring a strong central government.
u1500 [T1 R5 C1] 2b
u1501 [T1 R5 C2] Describe the major issues debated at the Constitutional Convention and analyze the solutions produced, including: the distribution of political power among states and within the federal government; the conduct of foreign affairs, commerce, and trade; the election of the executive; and slavery as a regional and federal issue. Examples: Electoral College, Great Compromise, Three-Fifths Compromise
u1502 [T1 R6 C1] 2c
u1503 [T1 R6 C2] Compare the arguments of Federalists and Anti-Federalists regarding ratification of the United States Constitution, and explain how the Bill of Rights represented a compromise between fundamental liberties and the powers of government.
u1504 [T1 R7 C1] 3 Analyze the major policies and political developments of the presidencies of George Washington, John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and James Monroe.
u1505 [T1 R8 C1] 3a Identify and explain factors leading to the development of political parties, including the conflicting views of Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton, George Washington’s Farewell Address, and the election of 1800.
u1506 [T1 R9 C1] 3b
u1507 [T1 R9 C2] Analyze the development of economic infrastructure during the Early Republic, including the effects of Alexander Hamilton’s economic policies. Examples: excise tax and Whiskey Rebellion, Federal Road, National Bank
u1508 [T1 R10 C1] 3c
u1509 [T1 R10 C2] Explain the establishment of a national judiciary and its power, including the institution of judicial review in Marbury v. Madison (1803).
u1510 [T1 R11 C1] 3d Describe relations of the United States with Britain, France, and Native American nations from 1789 to 1812. Examples: Little Turtle’s War, Jay’s Treaty, XYZ Affair, Quasi-War, impressment, Tecumseh’s efforts to stop encroachment by settlers
=== page 95 === [running header: Grade 10 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1514 3e Analyze the political and economic causes and consequences of the War of 1812, including the impact on Native Americans.
u1515 Examples: Creek War, decline of Federalist Party, Era of Good Feelings, transatlantic trade, War Hawks
u1516 (x=41) 4 Assess how the American Revolution and its rhetoric affected the status of slavery in the newly formed United States.
u1517 (x=109) Examples: resumption and eventual ban on transatlantic slave trade, rise of manumission
u1518 4a Describe the growth of an anti-slavery movement in northern states through the founding of the first abolitionist societies, passage of gradual emancipation laws, court cases, and actions of individuals.
u1519 Examples: Benjamin Franklin and the Pennsylvania Society for the Abolition of Slavery, Lemuel Haynes, Mum Bett (Elizabeth Freeman), Quakers
u1520 [T1 R1 C1] 4b
u1521 [T1 R1 C2] Explain why the Northwest Ordinance's ban on slavery in new states north of the Ohio River (1787) was significant.
u1522 NATIONAL EXPANSION AND REFORM
u1524 Explain causes, courses, and consequences of United States’ expansionism and the rise of Manifest Destiny ideology prior to 1848.
u1525 [T2 R1 C1] 5a
u1526 [T2 R1 C2] Describe how the Treaty of Paris of 1783, Northwest Ordinance of 1785, Northwest Ordinance of 1787, and the Louisiana Purchase affected American territorial expansion.
u1527 [T2 R2 C1] 5b Summarize the effects of the Indian Removal Act and the Trail of Tears on Native Americans, and describe the efforts by different nations to oppose removal. Examples: assimilation, Black Hawk War, Worcester v. Georgia (1832), Seminole Wars
u1528 [T2 R3 C1] 5c Describe how scientific and technological advances helped facilitate expansion prior to 1848. Examples: canal systems, railroads, steam engines, turnpikes, westward expeditions
u1529 [T2 R4 C1] 5d
u1530 [T2 R4 C2] Analyze reasons for migration via the western trails and the consequences of the rapid settlement of California, Oregon, Texas, and Utah on those migrating, those residing in these regions, and on the United States as a whole. Examples: California Gold Rush and economic opportunity, Mormon Trail and religious freedom, Oregon Trail and the fur trade, Santa Fe Trail and trade with Mexico
u1531 [T2 R5 C1] 5e Compare major events in Alabama from 1781 to 1823, including statehood as part of the expanding nation, acquisition of land, settlement, and the Creek War, to events occurring elsewhere in the developing nation.
=== page 96 === [running header: Grade 10 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1535 [T1 R1 C1] 6 Evaluate the influence of American social and political reform on the emergence of a national identity from the early to mid-nineteenth century.
u1536 [T1 R2 C1] 6a
u1537 [T1 R2 C2] Describe the changes in political culture during the Age of Reform, including the concept of Jacksonian democracy. Examples: Electoral College reforms, expansion of suffrage, new political parties, penny press
u1538 [T1 R3 C1] 6b Investigate and share information on the influence of individuals and movements of art, religion, education, and literature on the emergence of a national identity. Examples: American Gothic literature, Horace Mann and public education, Hudson River School, Mormonism, Second Great Awakening, Transcendentalism
u1539 [T1 R4 C1] 7 Assess how women challenged their societal roles under the Cult of Domesticity through their participation in social movements prior to the Civil War. Examples: abolitionism, prison reform, Seneca Falls Convention, temperance movement, women’s suffrage
u1540 [T1 R5 C1] 7a
u1541 [T1 R5 C2] Summarize the contributions of women reformers in the early to mid-nineteenth century who sought to expand political and educational opportunities for women. Examples: Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Emma Willard, Lucretia Mott, Maria W. Stewart, Mary Lyon, Susan B. Anthony
u1542 [T1 R6 C1] 8
u1543 [T1 R6 C2] Explain how the acquisition of new land in the South and the invention of the cotton gin contributed to the growth of the cotton economy and increased demand for enslaved labor.
u1544 [T1 R7 C1] 8a Analyze the domestic slave trade/forced migration, labor, and variations in the practice of slavery in different areas of the United States. Examples: the Clotilda, Second Middle Passage, slave codes
u1545 [T1 R8 C1] 8b Describe how enslaved people maintained African traditions and created their own unique culture, including foodways, spiritual beliefs, and ceremonies. Examples: Gullah, hush harbors, jumping the broom, spirituals
u1546 [T1 R9 C1] 9
u1547 [T1 R9 C2] Explain how economic and social divisions led to heightened sectionalism between the North and the South, examining their geographical and economic distinctions and the disparities between agrarian and industrial interests.
u1548 [T1 R10 C1] 9a
u1549 [T1 R10 C2] Explain how the Market Revolution fostered economic, cultural, and demographic changes in northern states. Examples: factory system, immigration, mechanized agriculture, textiles
u1550 [T1 R11 C1] 9b
u1551 [T1 R11 C2] Describe the central ideas of Henry Clay’s American System, and explain how the implementation of these concepts contributed to the growth of the American economy and sectionalism.
=== page 97 === [running header: Grade 10 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1555 [T1 R1 C1] 9c
u1556 [T1 R1 C2] Compare and contrast political and sectional views on economic policies, and explain how these views led to political conflict during the early to mid-nineteenth century. Examples: Nullification Crisis, John C. Calhoun’s “Exposition and Protest,” Jackson’s Bank War
u1557 A NATION DIVIDED
u1558 10 Trace the evolution and expansion of abolitionism, examining the contributions of key abolitionist figures and analyzing the reactions of both southern and northern communities to this campaign.
u1559 [T2 R1 C1] 10a Describe forms of resistance to slavery demonstrated by enslaved and free Black Americans, and assess the impact of resistance on southern states’ slave codes. Examples: Amistad Mutiny, breaking tools, German Coast Uprising, invisible church, Nat Turner’s Rebellion, self-emancipation
u1560 [T2 R2 C1] 10b Describe the rise of religious opposition to slavery during the Second Great Awakening, including the objections of Quakers, and how this fostered schisms within American churches. Examples: African Methodist Episcopal Church, Baptist and Methodist sectional splits
u1561 [T2 R3 C1] 10c Identify leading abolitionists, including Frederick Douglass and William Lloyd Garrison, and summarize the arguments they made in opposition to slavery and in rebuttal to pro-slavery rhetoric. Examples: abolitionists - Angelina and Sarah Grimké, Charles Sumner, Henry Highland Garnet, Sojourner Truth; pro-slavery advocates - James Henry Hammond, Thomas Dew
u1562 [T2 R4 C1] 10d Evaluate how the Underground Railroad and its leaders shaped the national discussion over slavery, including the passage of the Fugitive Slave Act and publication of Harriet Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin. Examples: Anthony Burns, Harriet Tubman, personal liberty laws, Prigg v. Pennsylvania (1842), vigilance committees
u1563 [T2 R5 C1] 11 Analyze how government policies and events related to slavery led to increased sectionalism throughout the United States prior to the Civil War.
u1564 [T2 R6 C1] 11a Summarize major legislation and court decisions from 1820 to 1861 that sought to address the issue of slavery, and describe the sectional responses to these government actions. Examples: Missouri Compromise, Compromise of 1850 and death of Whig Party, Kansas-Nebraska Act and Bleeding Kansas, Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857), Crittenden Compromises
u1565 [T2 R7 C1] 11b
u1566 [T2 R7 C2] Develop an argument to show how the causes and consequences of the Texas Revolution and Mexican-American War escalated sectional tension in the debate over slavery and expansion. Examples: Spot Resolutions and Abraham Lincoln, Wilmot Proviso, popular sovereignty, Free Soil Party, Henry David Thoreau and “Civil Disobedience,” Compromise of 1850
=== page 98 === [running header: Grade 10 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1570 [T1 R1 C1] 11c Describe how Alabamians were impacted by growing sectionalism from 1832 to 1861, including the reliance on cotton and slave labor, the Second Creek War, and secession. Examples: Peter Still and slave narratives, William Lowndes Yancey and the Alabama Platform
u1571 [T1 R2 C1] 11d Analyze the effect of sectionalism and debate over slavery on United States political parties in the 1850s and how this led to Abraham Lincoln’s 1860 election and the secession of southern states.
u1572 [T1 R3 C1] 12 Explain the progression of the Civil War, analyzing the events and the decisions by key figures that led to United States victory and the abolition of slavery.
u1573 [T1 R4 C1] 12a Compare the military strategy, leadership, and resources of the United States and the Confederate States of America, and evaluate how these factors shaped the outcomes of key battles. Examples: Anaconda Plan, Fort Sumter, Antietam, Gettysburg, Vicksburg, Appomattox Court House
u1574 [T1 R5 C1] 12b Summarize the political, social, and economic role that Alabama played in the Civil War. Examples: Battle of Mobile, conscription, first capital of the Confederacy, Selma Arsenal, supplying nurses
u1575 [T1 R6 C1] 12c Describe the social, economic, and political conditions that affected citizens during the Civil War and explain how both citizens and enslaved people contributed to the war effort. Examples: conscription, guerilla warfare, martial law, New York Draft Riots, U.S. Sanitary Commission, war bonds
u1576 [T1 R7 C1] 12d Summarize the effects of technological and scientific advancements of the mid-1800s on the strategy, battlefield tactics, and consequences of the Civil War. Examples: anesthesia, Minié ball, prosthetics, railroad, telegraph
u1577 [T1 R8 C1] 12e
u1578 [T1 R8 C2] Trace the progression of emancipation during and after the Civil War, including the effects of self-emancipation, the Emancipation Proclamation, Juneteenth, and the Thirteenth Amendment. Examples: Confiscation Acts, contraband camps, Robert Smalls, United States Colored Troops (USCT), Wallace Turnage
u1579 [T1 R9 C1] 13 Evaluate how Reconstruction affected the economic, political, and social landscape of the South.
u1580 (x=45) 13a Describe the roles of key groups in seeking to influence or resist economic, political, and social change throughout the Reconstruction era in the United States.
u1581 (x=109) Examples: Freedmen’s Bureau, Ku Klux Klan, Radical Republicans, Redeemer Democrats, Union Leagues
u1582 [T2 R1 C1] 13b
u1583 [T2 R1 C2] Compare congressional and presidential Reconstruction plans, including the legislation and constitutional amendments each plan proposed and passed. Examples: Lincoln’s Second Inaugural Address; Military Reconstruction Acts; proposals of Andrew Johnson, Thaddeus Stevens, Ulysses S. Grant; Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments
=== page 99 === [running header: Grade 10 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1587 [T1 R1 C1] 13c
u1588 [T1 R1 C2] Explain how ownership of one’s own labor and land were equated with freedom by freedpeople, and describe emerging labor systems that sought to limit this freedom in the former Confederacy. Examples: Black Codes, convict-lease labor, labor contracts, Southern Homestead Act of 1866, Special Field Order No. 15, tenant farming and sharecropping
u1589 [T1 R2 C1] 13d
u1590 [T1 R2 C2] Describe how Black Americans in the former Confederacy established new institutions and organizations to mobilize grassroots support for political participation and elect Black politicians to office. Examples: Africatown, churches, Colored Convention Movement, community schools, fraternal orders, mutual aid societies
u1591 [T1 R3 C1] 13e Develop an argument regarding how national and regional events and trends brought Reconstruction to an end. Examples: Panic of 1873, Redemption, Compromise of 1877, political violence
u1592 [T2 R1 C1] AMERICAN EXPANSION POST-CIVIL WAR
u1593 [T2 R2 C1] 14
u1594 [T2 R2 C2] Explain how westward expansion after the Civil War created economic growth in the West and affected the people living there as well as those migrating to the region.
u1595 [T2 R3 C1] 14a
u1596 [T2 R3 C2] Evaluate the contributions of the Homestead Act and the transcontinental railroad to increased migration to and settlement of the West. Examples: boomtowns, Chinese and Irish immigration, Exodusters, traqueros
u1597 [T2 R4 C1] 14b
u1598 [T2 R4 C2] Describe the economic and environmental impacts of new industries during the settlement of the West, including the mining and cattle industries. Examples: conservation versus preservation, range wars, vaqueros and cattle drives
u1599 [T2 R5 C1] 14c Explain the effects of federal policies and military actions on Native Americans after the Civil War and describe Native American resistance to these actions. Examples: boarding schools, Dawes Act (1887), Ghost Dance, Red River War, reservations
u1600 [T2 R6 C1] 15
u1601 [T2 R6 C2] Evaluate the United States’ efforts to increase engagement with Asia and the Pacific Islands in the late nineteenth century. Examples: Christian missionaries, establishment of overseas markets, purchase of Alaska, Robert Shufeldt’s treaties
u1602 [T2 R7 C1] 15a
u1603 [T2 R7 C2] Describe the economic contributions of Asian immigrants in the second half of the nineteenth century and the hostility they faced in the United States. Examples: Burlingame Treaty, Chinese Exclusion Act, contract labor system, railroad and mining industries, Rock Springs Massacre
u1604 [T2 R8 C1] 15b
u1605 [T2 R8 C2] Summarize why the United States sought to acquire the Hawaiian Islands and describe native Hawaiians’ efforts to resist annexation. Examples: Bayonet Constitution, Queen Lili’uokalani, sugar industry, Wilcox Rebellion of 1889
=== page 100 === [running header: Grade 10 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1609 THE DEVELOPMENT OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA
u1610 16 Describe the transformation of American society and politics during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
u1611 [T1 R1 C1] 16a Analyze how the growing awareness of economic and political corruption during the Gilded Age led to reform efforts on both state and national levels. Examples: Australian ballot, Boss Tweed, Crédit Mobilier Scandal, patronage, Pendleton Act, Thomas Nast
u1612 [T1 R2 C1] 16b
u1613 [T1 R2 C2] Describe the changes in American society that resulted from the inventions and innovations of business leaders, entrepreneurs, and inventors of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Examples: Alexander Graham Bell, Andrew Carnegie, George Washington Carver, John D. Rockefeller, Madame C.J. Walker, Thomas Edison
u1614 [T1 R3 C1] 17
u1615 [T1 R3 C2] Analyze the push and pull factors contributing to the rapid growth of cities in the United States during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
u1616 [T1 R4 C1] 17a Summarize social, economic, and cultural consequences of urbanization for American society, including changes in living and working conditions, the emergence of new social classes, and the growth of leisure opportunities.
u1617 [T1 R5 C1] 17b Explain how various reform and reactionary movements emerged in response to the challenges of urbanization and immigration. Examples: eugenics, efforts to address urban poverty, Jane Addams and the settlement house movement, nativism, Social Darwinism, Social Gospel movement
u1618 [T1 R6 C1] 17c
u1619 [T1 R6 C2] Investigate and recount the experiences of immigrant communities in urban America, including patterns of settlement, cultural assimilation, and origins of migration. Examples: being processed at Ellis Island and Angel Island, Chinese Exclusion Act, New Immigrant v. Old Immigrant, United States v. Wong Kim Ark (1898)
u1620 [T1 R7 C1] 18 Describe the emergence of the Populist and Progressive movements and explain changes brought about by individual reformers and organizations.
u1621 [T1 R8 C1] 18a Develop an argument supporting the significance of the National Farmers Alliance, Colored Farmers’ National Alliance, and the Grange in shaping the life of farmers and promoting economic reform. Examples: Interstate Commerce Act of 1887, Coxey’s Army, Populist Party and 1896 election, candidacy of William Jennings Bryan
u1622 [T1 R9 C1] 18b Assess the effectiveness of muckrakers’ use of literature, newspapers, photography, and other media to inspire change during the Progressive Era. Examples: Elizabeth Cochrane Seaman, Florence Kelley, Ida Tarbell, Jacob Riis, Lincoln Steffens, Upton Sinclair
=== page 101 === [running header: Grade 10 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1626 [T1 R1 C1] 18c
u1627 [T1 R1 C2] Summarize the rise of labor unions and their efforts to improve working conditions in industrial America. Examples: American Federation of Labor, Atlanta Washerwomen Strike, Homestead Strike, Industrial Workers of the World, Knights of Labor and the eight-hour day, Pullman Strike
u1628 [T1 R2 C1] 18d Analyze the roles and differing viewpoints of female reformers and women’s organizations in guiding the women’s suffrage and temperance movements. Examples: Carrie Nation, Frances Willard, Mary Church Terrell, National American Woman Suffrage Association, Woman’s Christian Temperance Union, women’s club movement
u1629 [T1 R3 C1] 19 Describe the emergence of the New South economy and Jim Crow era, and explain the corresponding efforts to secure civil rights by Black Americans after Reconstruction.
u1630 [T1 R4 C1] 19a Explain how Jim Crow laws, Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), and violence shaped the economic, political, and social structure of the New South after Reconstruction. Examples: disenfranchisement, lynching, segregation
u1631 [T1 R5 C1] 19b Summarize political and social motives that influenced the writing of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, and explain its effect on politics and economics in Alabama.
u1632 [T1 R6 C1] 19c Analyze the ideologies, efforts, and impacts of civil rights reformers, groups, and civic organizations that challenged Jim Crow laws and violence at the turn of the twentieth century. Examples: Henry McNeal Turner, Ida B. Wells, National Urban League, Nannie Helen Burroughs, Niagara Movement, W.E.B. DuBois
u1633 [T1 R7 C1] 19d Describe the efforts of reformers to create greater educational and economic opportunities for Black Americans through the establishment of new institutions and organizations. Examples: Booker T. Washington, Charles Clinton Spaulding, Halle Tanner Dillon Johnson, HBCUs, Maggie Walker, Rosenwald Schools
u1634 [T1 R8 C1] 20 Compare and contrast the domestic agendas and accomplishments of Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, and Woodrow Wilson.
u1635 [T1 R9 C1] 20a
u1636 [T1 R9 C2] Critique the effectiveness of national legislation passed during the Progressive Era in addressing concerns regarding business practices, including the Sherman Antitrust Act and the Clayton Antitrust Act.
u1637 [T1 R10 C1] 20b
u1638 [T1 R10 C2] Describe the political reforms passed during the Progressive Era. Examples: Sixteenth, Seventeenth, Eighteenth, and Nineteenth Amendments; initiative, recall, referendum
=== page 102 === [running header: Grade 11 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1642 (x=140) United States History II: World War I to Present
u1644 United States History II: World War I to Present is a one-credit course that focuses on the modern history of the country with a strong emphasis on expanding students’ understanding of American principles. The course begins with America’s entry into World War I as a recognized world power and offers a chronological study of major events, issues, movements, individuals, and groups in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, viewed from both national and Alabama perspectives.
u1645 The course emphasizes the skills needed to analyze this period of history. Standards challenge students to develop critical thinking skills, analyze primary and secondary sources, and evaluate different historical perspectives, leading to greater understanding of how this period shaped the United States and fostering the ability to connect historical events to current affairs.
u1646 Course Topics: 1. Rise to World Power 2. Roaring Twenties and the Great Depression 3. World War II 4. Post-World War II America 5. Late Twentieth-Century America 6. Contemporary America
u1647 LOOKING BACK, LOOKING AHEAD: In fourth and fifth grades, students studied Alabama history within the context of United States history. Students began a more in-depth study of United States history in sixth grade with a focus on civics. In high school, tenth grade history standards reviewed and reinforced the founding principles of the United States and concluded with the rise of industrialism and the Progressive movement. In eleventh grade, students continue the United States history timeline with World War I and progress to the present, building a deeper understanding of the twentieth century, which was studied through a world history lens in ninth grade. Students finish their high school social studies education in twelfth grade with an introduction to economics and the United States government.
u1648 SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u1649 The two sets of skills outlined below help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in college, career, and civic life: disciplinary thinking skills and social studies practices. The development of disciplinary thinking is foundational to a successful, engaging experience in social studies education. The disciplines are color-coded to show their alignment with disciplinary connection standards.
u1650 Each practice in the left column of the table below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they engage in disciplinary thinking in social studies?”
=== page 103 === [running header: Grade 11 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1654 [T1 R1 C2] ● Evaluate the impact of economic activities and political decisions on spatial patterns within and among urban, suburban, and rural regions. ● Evaluate how political and economic decisions throughout time have influenced cultural and environmental characteristics of various places and regions. ● Analyze the reciprocal nature of how historical events and the spatial diffusion of ideas, technologies, and cultural practices have influenced migration patterns and the distribution of human population.
u1655 [T1 R2 C2] ● Use appropriate data to evaluate the state of employment, unemployment, and economic growth in the economy. ● Explain benefits and the costs of trade policies to individuals, businesses, and society. ● Explain why standards of living increase as productivity improves. ● Describe the possible consequences, both intended and unintended, of government policies to improve market outcomes.
u1656 [T1 R3 C2] ● Evaluate how historical events and developments were shaped by unique circumstances of time and place as well as broader historical contexts. ● Evaluate the relative influence of various causes of events and developments in the past. ● Analyze the relationship between historical sources and secondary interpretations made from these sources. ● Use questions generated about individuals and groups to assess how the significance of their actions changes over time and is shaped by the historical context. ● Analyze change and continuity in historical eras.
u1657 [T1 R4 C2] ● Analyze the impact of constitutions, laws, treaties, and international agreements on the maintenance of national and international order. ● Evaluate citizens’ and institutions’ effectiveness in addressing social and political problems at the local, state, tribal, national, and/or international level. ● Analyze how people use and challenge local, state, national, and international laws to address a variety of public issues. ● Evaluate public policies in terms of intended and unintended outcomes. ● Analyze historical, contemporary, and emerging means of changing societies, promoting the common good, and protecting rights.
u1658 The areas of disciplinary thinking and corresponding skills outlined above provide the tools for students to explore course content at a greater depth and establish a deeper understanding. In addition, the following social studies practices develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom.
u1659 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
=== page 104 === [running header: Grade 11 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1663 [T1 R1 C2] ● Gather relevant information from multiple sources representing a wide range of views, using the origin, authority, structure, context, and corroborative value of the sources to guide the selection. ● Evaluate the credibility of a source by examining how experts value the source. ● Identify evidence that draws information directly and substantively from multiple sources to detect inconsistencies in evidence in order to revise or strengthen claims. ● Refine claims and counterclaims, attending to the precision, significance, and knowledge conveyed through the claim while pointing out the strengths and limitations of both.
u1664 [T1 R2 C2] ● Construct written arguments using precise and knowledgeable claims with evidence from multiple sources, while acknowledging counterclaims and evidentiary weaknesses. ● Construct written explanations using sound reasoning, correct sequence (linear or nonlinear), examples, and details with significant and pertinent information and data, while acknowledging the strengths and weaknesses of the explanation given its purpose (e.g., cause and effect, chronological, procedural, technical). ● Present arguments and explanations that feature ideas and perspectives on historical issues and topics to reach a range of audiences using print, oral, and digital technologies. ● Critique the use of claims and evidence in arguments for credibility. ● Critique the use of the reasoning, sequencing, and supporting details of explanations.
u1665 UNITED STATES HISTORY II:
u1666 WORLD WAR I TO PRESENT
u1667 (x=227) CONTENT STANDARDS
u1668 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8.
u1669 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u1670 [T2 R1 C1] RISE TO WORLD POWER
u1671 [T2 R2 C1] 1 Summarize conflicting viewpoints over the United States’ role in the world from the Spanish-American War to its entry into World War I. Examples: Alfred Thayer Mahan and naval power, Anna Julia Cooper and anti-colonialism, Frederick Jackson Turner’s “Frontier Thesis,” Jane Addams’ democratic critique of imperialism, Josiah Strong and the missionary impulse
u1672 [T2 R3 C1] 1a Explain how yellow journalism, jingoistic sentiments, and economic interests led to American entry into war with Spain. Examples: Cuban War of Independence, José Martí and the Cuban émigré community in Florida, Joseph Pulitzer, USS Maine, William Randolph Hearst
u1673 [T2 R4 C1] 1b
u1674 [T2 R4 C2] Describe the consequences of the Spanish-American War, including the United States’ rise to global prominence, debate over territorial expansion, and military intervention in Cuba and the Philippines. Examples: American Anti-Imperialist League, Philippine-American War, Platt
=== page 105 === [running header: Grade 11 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1678 [T1 R1 C2] Amendment
u1679 [T1 R2 C1] 1c
u1680 [T1 R2 C2] Trace United States’ interventions around the world under Theodore Roosevelt’s Big Stick Diplomacy, William Howard Taft’s Dollar Diplomacy, and Woodrow Wilson’s Moral Diplomacy. Examples: Mexican Revolution, military occupation of Haiti, Panama Canal, Venezuelan Crisis
u1681 [T1 R3 C1] 1d Compare and contrast the arguments of those in the United States who advocated for preparedness and those who sought neutrality from 1914 to 1917.
u1682 [T1 R4 C1] 1e Summarize the events and factors that led to the United States entry into World War I. Examples: American economic interests, sinking of the Lusitania, unrestricted submarine warfare, Zimmerman Telegram
u1683 [T1 R5 C1] 2 Trace United States military involvement in World War I and the contributions of the American Expeditionary Force to the victory of the Allied Powers. Examples: 167th Infantry Regiment, Alvin York, John Pershing, Meuse-Argonne Offensive, Second Battle of the Marne, St. Mihiel
u1684 [T1 R6 C1] 2a Describe the roles of Black Americans as members of the military and on the home front during World War I, including the Harlem Hellfighters and the Great Migration. Examples: James Reese Europe, labor battalions, Tuskegee and opening of first VA hospital for Black soldiers, W.E.B DuBois and The Crisis, William Henry Johnson
u1685 [T1 R7 C1] 2b
u1686 [T1 R7 C2] Describe the changing roles and rights of women in the United States that resulted from their contributions to World War I and ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment. Examples: Alice Paul, Anne Mae Beddow, National American Woman Suffrage Association, National Association of Colored Women (NACW), National Woman’s Party
u1687 [T1 R8 C1] 2c Analyze how government actions in the United States during World War I produced both economic growth and social division. Examples: Committee on Public Information, Espionage and Sedition Acts, National War Labor Board, Schenck v. United States (1919), Selective Service, War Industries Board
u1688 [T1 R9 C1] 2d Compare the reasons given by opposing sides in the debate over whether the United States should ratify the Treaty of Versailles (1919). Examples: Wilson’s 14 Points, League of Nations, Lodge Reservations
u1689 ROARING TWENTIES AND THE GREAT DEPRESSION
u1690 Evaluate how key figures, events, and trends shaped United States society and culture from the conclusion of World War I through the 1920s.
u1692 Examples: Carrie Chapman Catt, flappers, Marcus Garvey, Spanish Flu Epidemic, William Monroe Trotter
=== page 106 === [running header: Grade 11 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1696 [T1 R1 C1] 3a
u1697 [T1 R1 C2] Describe how the automobile, cinema, print media, and radio contributed to the rise in mass culture, economic growth, and expansion of the middle class during the 1920s.
u1698 [T1 R2 C1] 3b Explain how art, literature, and music, including that produced by Alabamians, influenced both the Harlem Renaissance and the broader culture of the 1920s. Examples: Aaron Douglas, Ernest Hemingway, F. Scott and Zelda Fitzgerald, Langston Hughes, W.C. Handy, Zora Neale Hurston
u1699 [T1 R3 C1] 3c Explain why the 1920s comprised a period of significant social conflict as manifested by the Scopes trial, growth of the Ku Klux Klan, rise of nativist thinking, the Red Scare, and antisemitism. Examples: anarchists, Immigration Act of 1924, Palmer Raids, Sacco and Vanzetti trial, Wall Street bombing
u1700 [T1 R4 C1] 3d Summarize the debate over prohibition and describe how prohibition contributed to social and cultural changes of the 1920s.
u1701 [T1 R5 C1] 3e Trace the causes and course of Red Summer and subsequent violence into the 1920s, including the Tulsa Race Massacre. Examples: anti-lynching movement, demobilization of Black veterans, Chicago Race Riots, Elaine Massacre, emergence of the “New Negro” Movement, Rosewood Massacre
u1702 [T1 R6 C1] 4
u1703 [T1 R6 C2] Analyze the causes of the Great Depression, including the effects of overproduction, stock market speculation, buying on credit, international trade policy, and restrictive monetary policies.
u1704 [T1 R7 C1] 4a Differentiate between the ways Herbert Hoover and Franklin Roosevelt dealt with the Great Depression. Examples: associationalism, Bonus Army, fireside chats, rugged individualism, support of government spending
u1705 [T1 R8 C1] 4b
u1706 [T1 R8 C2] Critique the effectiveness of the New Deal in managing problems of the Great Depression through relief, recovery, and reform programs; expansion of the executive branch; and the application of Keynesian economic theory. Examples: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), Glass-Steagall Act, Social Security Act, Works Progress Administration (WPA)
u1707 [T1 R9 C1] 5 Identify economic and social effects of the Great Depression and the Dust Bowl on American society and describe how individuals addressed the challenges and sought to help others in need. Examples: effects - Hoovervilles, labor unrest, migration; individuals - Dorothea Lange, Eleanor Roosevelt, John Steinbeck, Mary McLeod Bethune
u1708 [T1 R10 C1] 5a Describe the effects of New Deal programs on Alabama, outlining the problems they sought to address. Examples: Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), expansion of electric power, Moundville Archaeological Park, Muscle Shoals Bill, Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA)
=== page 107 === [running header: Grade 11 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1712 5b Analyze the impact of the Great Depression and the resulting social programs on the American family and minority groups.
u1713 Examples: Black Cabinet, Home Owners’ Loan Corporation, Indian Reorganization Act, National Housing Act of 1934, Scottsboro Boys, She-She-She Camps
u1714 WORLD WAR II
u1716 Trace the progression of events and policies leading to World War II and the United States’ entry into the war.
u1717 [T1 R1 C1] 6a Summarize the United States’ foreign policies of isolationism and internationalism as World War II began and explain how the bombing of Pearl Harbor affected this approach. Examples: American Committee for the Non-Participation in Japanese Aggression, Committee to Defend America by Aiding the Allies, Destroyers for Bases Agreement, Lend-Lease Act, Neutrality Acts, Quarantine Speech
u1718 [T1 R2 C1] 6b Critique the evolving United States policy and public attitudes toward Nazi Germany and the growing refugee crisis as the Holocaust began. Examples: America First Committee (AFC), Evian Conference, Father Coughlin, MS St. Louis, Wagner-Rogers Bill
u1719 [T1 R3 C1] 7 Analyze how United States military involvement shaped major events of World War II.
u1720 [T1 R4 C1] 7a
u1721 [T1 R4 C2] Develop an argument supporting the thesis that major battles of World War II in which the United States was involved were turning points of the war and outline the impact of these battles on territorial occupation by the Allied and Axis powers. Examples: Battle of the Atlantic, Battle of the Coral Sea, Battle of Midway, Operation Overlord, Battle of the Bulge, Philippines campaign, Battle of Okinawa
u1722 [T1 R5 C1] 7b Compare and contrast the roles and leadership of United States leaders in securing victory for the Allied powers during World War II. Examples: Chester Nimitz, Douglas McArthur, Dwight D. Eisenhower, Franklin Roosevelt, George S. Patton, Harry S. Truman
u1723 [T1 R6 C1] 7c Evaluate the effectiveness of United States strategies in the war, including the decision to utilize atomic weapons on Japan. Examples: Europe First, island hopping, Operation Overlord, participation of Native American Code Talkers, strategic bombing
u1724 [T1 R7 C1] 7d Describe the role of the United States military in helping end the Holocaust, including the liberation of concentration camps and participation in the Nuremberg Trials. Examples: Buchenwald, Dachau, Declaration on Atrocities, War Refugee Board
u1725 [T1 R8 C1] 7e Explain how key consequences of World War II shaped United States foreign policy after the war. Examples: American occupation of Europe and Japan, creation of the United Nations, Soviet occupation of Eastern Europe, Universal Declaration of Human Rights
=== page 108 === [running header: Grade 11 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1730 Analyze the domestic, economic, and civil rights impact of World War II on United States society.
u1731 (x=109) Examples: growth of the federal government, increased wealth in the Black American community, population shifts, wartime industrial organization
u1732 8a Describe Alabama's participation in World War II, including the role of the Tuskegee Airmen, housing prisoner of war (POW) camps, growth of the Port of Mobile, production of steel in Birmingham, and the establishment of military bases.
u1733 8b Explain how minority groups organized to gain access to wartime jobs and how they confronted discrimination, including the Bracero Program and Double V Campaign.
u1734 Examples: Lanham Act (1940) and childcare, March on Washington Movement and Executive Order 8802, Zoot Suit Riots, Detroit Race Riot of 1943, Port Chicago Mutiny, Longoria Affair
u1735 8c Describe the experiences of Japanese Americans in World War II, including their internment on the home front and military contributions in Europe to Allied victory.
u1736 Examples: 442nd Regimental Combat Team, Executive Order 9066, Korematsu v. United States (1944)
u1737 8d Describe how World War II led to advances in mass media, medicine, science, and technology. Examples: blood transfusions, Manhattan Project, penicillin, radar, United States Office of War Information, Voice of America
u1738 POST-WORLD WAR II AMERICA
u1739 9 Outline the foreign policy changes that led the United States into the Cold War and contributed to its emergence as a superpower.
u1740 9a Develop an argument regarding the effectiveness of the United States policy of containment that resulted from its growing ideological and political tensions with the Soviet Union.
u1741 Examples: Berlin Airlift, Marshall Plan, North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Truman Doctrine, United Nations, Warsaw Pact
u1742 9b Compare the application of the United States’ policy of containment to various areas of the world outside the Soviet Union in the late 1940s and 1950s.
u1743 Examples: Taiwan Straits Crisis of 1954-55, 1954 Guatemalan coup d’etat, Suez Canal Crisis of 1956, Hungarian Revolution of 1956
u1744 9c Identify and explain the origins of the United States’ involvement in the Korean War and the consequences of Harry Truman’s limited war plan for Korea.
u1745 9d Analyze the domestic responses to the Cold War, including the impact of McCarthyism. Examples: amending the Pledge of Allegiance, Hiss and Rosenberg espionage cases, House Un-American Activities Committee, loyalty oaths, Second Red Scare
u1746 10 Evaluate the influence of events, organizations, and individual actions on the expansion of the Civil Rights Movement nationally.
=== page 109 === [running header: Grade 11 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1750 [T1 R1 C1] 10a Identify and explain key events from 1945 to 1955 that brought about the emergence of a large-scale movement for civil rights. Examples: return of Black veterans from World War II, Journey of Reconciliation, Harry Truman and “To Secure these Rights,” Thurgood Marshall and NAACP litigation campaign, lynching of Emmett Till
u1751 [T1 R2 C1] 10b
u1752 [T1 R2 C2] Analyze the extent to which the actions and campaigns of civil rights activists and organizations from 1954 to 1965 prompted federal measures to advance civil and human rights. Examples: NAACP and Brown v. Board of Education (1954); Montgomery Bus Boycott and Browder v. Gayle (1956); desegregation of schools and use of military protection; Birmingham Campaign, March on Washington, and Civil Rights Act of 1964; Selma-to-Montgomery March and Voting Rights Act of 1965; attorney Fred Gray and Judge Frank M. Johnson
u1753 [T1 R3 C1] 10c Compare and contrast the actions and philosophies of key civil rights leaders and organizations, including Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. and Malcolm X. Examples: individuals - A. Philip Randolph, Diane Nash, Ella Baker, Dorothy Height, Joseph H. Jackson, Robert F. Williams; organizations - Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights (ACMHR), Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)
u1754 [T1 R4 C1] 10d Summarize the political, economic, and physical means by which opponents of the Civil Rights Movement sought to limit its achievements. Examples: assassinations, blockbusting, bombing of 16th Street Baptist Church, congressional filibuster, employment termination, Massive Resistance
u1755 [T1 R5 C1] 10e Describe how key Alabamians provided leadership, generated change, or demonstrated resistance to the Civil Rights Movement. Examples: leaders - Amelia Boynton, Fred Shuttlesworth, John Hulett, John Lewis, Rosa Parks, T.Y. Rogers; footsoldiers - Charles Bonner, Frederick Reese, Gwen Patton, James Hood, Robert Graetz, Vivian Malone; resistance - Eugene “Bull” Connor, George Wallace, National States’ Rights Party, White Citizens Council
u1756 [T1 R6 C1] 11 Analyze how cultural changes, economic growth, and government action during the Truman and Eisenhower administrations shaped the daily lives of Americans. Examples: Baby Boom, G.I. Bill of Rights, growth of the consumer-based middle class, impact of rock and roll, influence of television, implications of the National Defense Education Act
u1757 [T1 R7 C1] 11a Evaluate the effects of the arms and space races on the growth of the military-industrial complex. Examples: NASA, National Interstate and Defense Highways Act, Project Apollo, Redstone Arsenal, U.S. Army Space and Missile Command
=== page 110 === [running header: Grade 11 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1761 [T1 R1 C1] 11b
u1762 [T1 R1 C2] Describe the demographic and political changes that occurred as some populations shifted from cities to suburbs. Examples: growth of the Republican Party in the South, home ownership, Levittown, suburbanization, Sunbelt Theory
u1763 LATE TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICA
u1764 (x=41) 12 Compare and contrast major domestic initiatives of John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson, and explain how Kennedy’s assassination led to both change and continuity in these initiatives.
u1765 (x=109) Examples: New Frontier - Equal Pay Act of 1963, Community Mental Health Act of 1963; Great Society - Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, Fair Housing Act of 1968
u1766 [T2 R1 C1] 12a
u1767 [T2 R1 C2] Investigate the major elements of Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society program and explain how it represents an attempt to expand the American social safety net, including the War on Poverty, Medicare, Medicaid, and Head Start.
u1768 [T2 R2 C1] 13 Explain the evolution of America’s Cold War policy to defend democracy and contain communism around the world and how this led to an escalation in armed conflict during the 1960s. Example: Alliance for Progress, domino theory, flexible response, Johnson Doctrine
u1769 [T2 R3 C1] 13a Assess the effectiveness of John F. Kennedy’s foreign policy toward Cuba, including the Bay of Pigs invasion and the Cuban Missile Crisis.
u1770 [T2 R4 C1] 13b Investigate and explain the effects of the domino theory and the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution on United States involvement in the Vietnam conflict.
u1771 [T2 R5 C1] 13c Describe how significant events in the Vietnam War resulted in a decline of public support for American involvement in the conflict. Examples: first televised war, Tet Offensive, My Lai Massacre, secret bombings of Cambodia and Laos, Pentagon Papers, fall of Saigon
u1772 [T2 R6 C1] 13d Evaluate the relationship between domestic social movements, including the New Left and counterculture movements, and America’s war in Vietnam and explain how the movements and the war each influenced public perception of the other. Examples: Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) v. Young Americans for Freedom (YAF), Woodstock Music and Art Fair, “Silent Majority” speech, Kent State shooting, Hard Hat Riot
u1773 [T2 R7 C1] 14 Explain shifts in the scope of the Civil Rights Movement from the mid-1960s into the 1970s, including geographic regions, issues of focus, and participation. Examples: Watts Uprising, Chicago Freedom Movement, Black Power Movement, Black Panther Party, Poor People’s Campaign, Memphis Sanitation Strike, Black Arts Movement
u1774 [T2 R8 C1] 14a Explain how the Civil Rights Movement inspired other movements for civil and human rights, and describe the contributions of groups and individuals to these movements. Examples: Asian American Political Alliance and the Asian American Movement, Brown Berets and the Chicano Freedom Movement, Cesar Chavez and the Farmworkers’ Movement, Chief
=== page 111 === [running header: Grade 11 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1778 [T1 R1 C1] Calvin McGhee and the American Indian Movement, Judith Huemann and the Disability Rights Movement
u1779 [T1 R2 C1] 14b Evaluate the social and political significance of the women’s rights movement from the 1960s to the 1980s on the lives of women in the United States. Examples: Betty Friedan and The Feminine Mystique, Equal Rights Amendment (ERA), Phyllis Schlafly, Title IX
u1780 [T1 R3 C1] 14c
u1781 [T1 R3 C2] Compare and contrast major Supreme Court decisions from the 1960s through the 1980s and explain how they reflect an ongoing national debate regarding the expansion and limits of civil liberties, civil rights, and constitutional protections. Examples: Gideon v. Wainwright (1963), Miranda v. Arizona (1966), Lau v. Nichols (1974), Justice Earl Warren, Justice Warren Burger
u1782 [T1 R4 C1] 15 Describe how significant domestic events during the presidencies of Richard Nixon and Jimmy Carter shaped United States economics, politics, and society.
u1783 [T1 R5 C1] 15a Trace the events that fostered the emergence of the modern environmental movement and prompted government regulations as well as civic action. Examples: Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring, Earth Day, passage of the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Three Mile Island accident
u1784 [T1 R6 C1] 15b Outline the events that led to the Watergate scandal and brought about the resignation of President Richard Nixon and the presidency of Gerald Ford.
u1785 [T1 R7 C1] 15c
u1786 [T1 R7 C2] Identify the reasons for the economic fluctuations of the 1970s and evaluate the effectiveness of government action on the problem of stagflation. Examples: Nixon - gas rationing, wage and price freezes; Ford - Whip Inflation Now (WIN); Carter - “Crisis of Confidence” speech, deregulation, energy conservation
u1787 [T1 R8 C1] 16 Describe significant foreign policy events during the presidencies of Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, and Jimmy Carter that decreased hostility in the Cold War. Examples: normalization of relations with China, signing of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT), Helsinki Accords
u1788 [T1 R9 C1] 16a Analyze how America’s foreign policy decisions in the Vietnam War shaped Cold War actions in the 1970s, including détente and increased concern for human rights. Examples: Nixon Doctrine, support of Chilean coup d’etat and Augusto Pinochet, War Powers Act, Church Committee, Executive Orders 11905 and 12036
u1789 [T1 R10 C1] 16b Evaluate how the United States’ increasing involvement in the Middle East during the 1970s affected both the region and the United States itself. Examples: Arab-Israeli War of 1973, 1973 OPEC oil embargo, Camp David Accords, Iran Hostage Crisis
u1790 [T1 R11 C1] 17 Analyze the conservative revolution in American politics and how this shaped Ronald Reagan’s domestic and foreign policies.
=== page 112 === [running header: Grade 11 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1794 [T1 R1 C1] 17a Describe the growth and composition of movement conservatism beginning in the 1960s, and explain how this culminated in the formation of the Reagan Coalition and led to his election in 1980. Examples: Barry Goldwater, conservative Democrats, Moral Majority, neoconservatives, think tanks, William F. Buckley, Jr.
u1795 [T1 R2 C1] 17b
u1796 [T1 R2 C2] Analyze how Reaganomics and deregulation affected the American economy and society. Examples: influence of Milton Friedman, supply-side economics, welfare reform
u1797 [T1 R3 C1] 17c Trace the series of events during Reagan’s presidency leading to the emergence of the United States as the sole superpower, the fall of the Berlin Wall, and the collapse of the Soviet Union. Examples: Soviet-Afghan War, Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), invasion of Grenada, glasnost and perestroika, Iran-Contra Affair, Reagan’s “Tear down this wall” speech
u1798 CONTEMPORARY AMERICA
u1799 18 Analyze the shifts in United States foreign policy and challenges to it after the Cold War and into the twenty-first century.
u1800 [T2 R1 C1] 18a
u1801 [T2 R1 C2] Investigate the role and influence of the United States in peacekeeping efforts around the world from the 1990s into the early twenty-first century. Examples: Somalia, former Yugoslavia, Rwanda, Good Friday Agreement
u1802 [T2 R2 C1] 18b Evaluate the effectiveness of the United States’ response to the September 11 attacks, including the war in Afghanistan, creation of the Department of Homeland Security, and passage of the USA PATRIOT Act.
u1803 [T2 R3 C1] 18c Compare and contrast Operation Desert Storm and Operation Iraqi Freedom, including why they took place, the domestic political consequences of United States’ involvement in these conflicts, and the international implications for these wars.
u1804 [T2 R4 C1] 19
u1805 [T2 R4 C2] Evaluate how political developments and technology shaped economic trends and fluctuations from the 1990s into the early twenty-first century. Examples: 1999 Seattle World Trade Organization protests, automation, dot-com boom and bust, globalization, Great Recession of 2008, North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
u1806 [T2 R5 C1] 19a
u1807 [T2 R5 C2] Trace the evolution of the environmental movement and political debate over climate change from the 1980s to the present, including how environmental and natural disasters have shaped the discussion. Examples: Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill, Environmental Justice Movement, Exxon Valdez oil spill, Hurricane Katrina, Kyoto Protocol
u1808 [T2 R6 C1] 19b
u1809 [T2 R6 C2] Assess the economic and political effects of immigration on the United States and explain how immigration policies have evolved in the post-Cold War era. Examples: Haitian refugee crisis (1991-1994), Immigration Act of 1990, Operation Gatekeeper,“wet foot, dry foot” policy
=== page 113 === [running header: Grade 11 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1813 [T1 R1 C1] 20
u1814 [T1 R1 C2] Evaluate how federal policies and legislation have shaped American society since 1988. Examples: Americans with Disabilities Act, debate concerning universal healthcare, No Child Left Behind Act, Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act, Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act
u1815 [T1 R2 C1] 20a
u1816 [T1 R2 C2] Assess how political events beginning with the Clinton presidency and into the early 2000s contributed to growing political polarization. Examples: Clinton’s impeachment trial, Contract with America, Whitewater scandal, Swift Boat Veterans for Truth and rise of 527 organizations
u1817 [T1 R3 C1] 20b
u1818 [T1 R3 C2] Describe the significance of national elections from 1992 to the present, including the 2000 presidential recount in Florida and 2008 election of Barack Obama. Examples: impact of Ross Perot as third-party candidate, 1994 Republican Revolution
=== page 114 === [running header: Grade 12 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1821 Grade 12 Government
u1822 United States Government
u1824 United States Government is a required, half-credit course which pairs with another half-credit course, Economics, to provide twelfth grade students with a deeper understanding of the systems, processes, and institutions that shape the modern world. The goal of United States Government is to help students understand how the American government functions, the ideas and circumstances that shaped it, and its form today. Key elements of the course include the study of the Constitution, the three branches of government, the role of linkage institutions, and federalism. Mastering the knowledge and skills in this course enables students to better understand the issues being deliberated by today’s state and national governments and to comprehend their own role as responsible citizens in this process.
u1825 Course Topics: 1. Foundations of American Government 2. Branches of Government 3. Key Institutions and Political Participation 4. Citizenship and Civic Responsibilities 5. Local and State Government
u1826 LOOKING BACK, LOOKING AHEAD: By twelfth grade, students have completed both their world history and geography sequence and their United States history sequence, taking these studies through the end of the twentieth and into the twenty-first century. Examining the historical forces that shaped government and economics prepares students to learn how these systems operate today.
u1827 [T1 R1 C1] SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u1828 [T1 R2 C1] The two sets of skills outlined below help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in college, career, and civic life: disciplinary thinking skills and social studies practices. The development of disciplinary thinking is foundational to a successful, engaging experience in social studies education. The disciplines are color-coded to show their alignment with disciplinary connection standards. Each practice in the left column of the table below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they engage in disciplinary thinking in social studies?”
u1829 [T1 R3 C2] ● Evaluate how political and economic decisions throughout time have influenced cultural and environmental characteristics of various places and regions. ● Evaluate the impact of economic activities and political decisions on spatial patterns within and among urban, suburban, and rural regions. ● Analyze spatial patterns of population distribution to make informed decisions about where to allocate resources for public services.
=== page 115 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1832 Grade 12 Government
u1833 [T1 R1 C2] ● Generate possible explanations for a government role in markets when market inefficiencies exist. ● Use benefits and costs to evaluate the effectiveness of government policies intended to improve market outcomes. ● Describe the possible consequences, both intended and unintended, of government policies to improve market outcomes.
u1834 [T1 R2 C2] ● Analyze how historical contexts shaped and continue to shape policies in the United States. ● Evaluate primary and secondary sources to understand different perspectives and interpretations of historical events and government actions. ● Analyze the causes and effects of governmental decisions and policies throughout history.
u1835 [T1 R3 C2] ● Explain how the United States Constitution establishes a system of government with powers, responsibilities, and limits that have changed over time and that are still being contested. ● Analyze the impact and the appropriate roles of personal interests and perspectives on the application of civic virtues, democratic principles, constitutional rights, and human rights. ● Evaluate multiple procedures for making governmental decisions at the local, state, national, and international levels in terms of the civic purposes achieved. ● Analyze the role of citizens in the United States political system, with attention to various theories of democracy, changes in Americans’ participation over time, and alternative models from other countries, past and present.
u1836 The areas of disciplinary thinking and corresponding skills outlined above provide the tools for students to explore course content at a greater depth and establish a deeper understanding. In addition, the following social studies practices develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom.
u1837 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
u1838 [T2 R1 C2] ● Identify evidence that draws information directly and substantively from multiple sources to detect inconsistencies in evidence in order to revise or strengthen claims. ● Refine claims and counterclaims, attending to the precision, significance, and knowledge they convey while pointing out the strengths and limitations of both.
=== page 116 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1841 Grade 12 Government
u1842 [T1 R1 C2] ● Critique the use of claims and evidence in arguments for credibility. ● Apply a range of deliberative and democratic strategies and procedures. ● Use disciplinary and interdisciplinary lenses to understand the characteristics and causes of local, regional, and global problems; instances of such problems in multiple contexts; and challenges and opportunities faced by those trying to address these problems over time and place. ● Present arguments and explanations that feature ideas and perspectives on issues and topics to reach a range of audiences using print, oral, and digital technologies.
u1843 UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
u1844 (x=227) CONTENT STANDARDS
u1845 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8.
u1846 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u1847 [T2 R1 C1] FOUNDATIONS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT
u1848 [T2 R2 C1] 1
u1849 [T2 R2 C2] Explain how Enlightenment principles informed the structure and principles of the United States government, its founding documents, its institutions, and the division of powers, as set forth in Leviathan (Thomas Hobbes, 1651), Two Treatises of Government (John Locke, 1689), The Spirit of the Laws (Montesquieu, 1748), The Social Contract (Jean-Jacques Rousseau, 1762), and Treatise on Tolerance (Voltaire, 1763)
u1850 [T2 R3 C1] 2
u1851 [T2 R3 C2] Describe how the Declaration of Independence, the Articles of Confederation, and events of the American Revolution influenced the drafting and ratification of the United States Constitution and the Bill of Rights. Examples: Federalist Papers, monarchy v. democracy v. republic
u1852 [T2 R4 C1] 3 Analyze the major features and structural organization of the Constitution of the United States and the Bill of Rights.
u1853 [T2 R5 C1] 3a Summarize and explain the underlying principles of the Constitution, including checks and balances, federalism, limited government, popular sovereignty, republicanism, and separation of powers.
u1854 [T2 R6 C1] 3b Summarize the formal process of amending the Constitution of the United States.
u1855 [T2 R7 C1] 3c Explain how the Fourteenth Amendment extended rights to minority groups through the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses. Examples: United States v. Carolene Products Co. (1938), Hernandez v. Texas (1954), Browder v. Gayle (1956), Loving v. Virginia (1967), Reed v. Reed (1971), Tennessee v. Lane (2004)
=== page 117 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1858 Grade 12 Government
u1859 [T1 R1 C1] BRANCHES OF GOVERNMENT
u1860 [T1 R2 C1] 4
u1861 [T1 R2 C2] Describe the role and responsibilities of the legislative branch, including the process of lawmaking, the power of the purse, and the system of checks and balances within Congress.
u1862 [T1 R3 C1] 4a Compare and contrast the leadership roles within Congress, including the Speaker of the House, the Senate President Pro Tempore, majority and minority leaders, and party whips.
u1863 [T1 R4 C1] 4b Identify the types of congressional committees and explain their roles in policy-making. Examples: conference, joint, select, standing
u1864 [T1 R5 C1] 4c Outline the process by which a bill becomes a law, including introduction, committee review, floor debate, lobbyist actions, voting in both chambers, and presidential action. Examples: filibuster, logrolling, Rules Committee, veto
u1865 [T1 R6 C1] 5 Analyze how the functions and authority of the executive branch evolve through changes in the scope of presidential powers, executive orders, executive agreements, and the role of the president in foreign and domestic policy.
u1866 [T1 R7 C1] 5a Describe how the president of the United States utilizes formal powers to achieve policy goals, including veto power, addressing the nation in the State of the Union Address, and the authority to pardon.
u1867 [T1 R8 C1] 5b Describe how the president of the United States uses informal powers to shape public opinion, including interaction with media and the public, head of party, and symbolic powers of the Oval Office.
u1868 [T1 R9 C1] 5c Explain the role of the Cabinet and White House staff in the process of presidential decision-making.
u1869 [T1 R10 C1] 5d Compare and contrast the structures of the federal bureaucracy, including cabinet departments, independent regulatory commissions, government corporations, and independent executive agencies.
u1870 [T1 R11 C1] 6 Summarize the functions and duties of the judicial branch, including the power of judicial review and interpretation of laws.
u1871 [T1 R12 C1] 6a Explain the structure, jurisdiction, and processes of civil and criminal courts in the United States, including courts with original and appellate jurisdiction.
u1872 [T1 R13 C1] 6b Outline and explain the process of appointing Supreme Court Justices and other federal judges.
u1873 6c Contrast strict and loose constructionist views of the Constitution of the United States.
u1874 [T2 R1 C1] 6d
u1875 [T2 R1 C2] Explain how landmark United States Supreme Court cases have shaped the constitutional interpretation and expansion of civil liberties and civil rights. Examples: Gideon v. Wainwright (1963), Miranda v. Arizona (1966), Tinker v. Des Moines (1969), Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier (1988), Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union (1997)
=== page 118 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1878 Grade 12 Government
u1879 6e Describe the significance of Alabama landmark cases that impacted American society and governance.
u1880 Examples: Powell v. Alabama (1932), NAACP v. Alabama (1958), Gomillion v. Lightfoot (1960), Lee v. Macon (1964), Reynolds v. Sims (1964),Williams v. Wallace (1965)
u1881 [T1 R1 C1] KEY INSTITUTIONS AND POLITICAL PARTICIPATION
u1882 [T1 R2 C1] 7
u1883 [T1 R2 C2] Analyze how the expansion of suffrage affected the political system of the United States, including the enfranchisement of non-property owners, women, Black Americans, and persons 18 to 20 years of age.
u1884 [T1 R3 C1] 7a Explain how increases and shifts in political participation by minorities and other voting blocs shape political party coalitions, campaigns, and voter turnout.
u1885 [T1 R4 C1] 7b Describe how Black Codes, Jim Crow laws, and the Selma-to-Montgomery March influenced the passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
u1886 [T1 R5 C1] 7c Analyze historic and current barriers to voting access and voter turnout, and weigh the benefits and consequences of possible solutions.
u1887 [T1 R6 C1] 8 Describe how special interest groups and political action committees develop, how they function, and how their campaign contributions affect state and national elections.
u1888 [T1 R7 C1] 8a Summarize the effects of campaign finance rulings by the United States Supreme Court on the election process. Examples: Buckley v. Valeo (1976), Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission (2010), McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission (2014)
u1889 [T1 R8 C1] 8b Analyze examples of legislation or policy decisions that reflect the influence of special interest groups, and describe methods by which these groups seek to sway the policy-making process.
u1890 [T1 R9 C1] 9 Explain the role of the media in the political process, including how they shape public opinion.
u1891 [T1 R10 C1] 9a Analyze how public opinion is measured through polling.
u1892 [T1 R11 C1] 9b
u1893 [T1 R11 C2] Analyze the influence of television and digital media on elections and campaign spending. Examples: John F. Kennedy-Richard M. Nixon debate, use of social media
u1894 [T1 R12 C1] 10 Outline major characteristics and functions of contemporary political parties in the United States, including the role of state and national conventions as well as party leadership.
u1895 [T1 R13 C1] 10a
u1896 [T1 R13 C2] Describe how third-party candidates have historically affected elections in the United States, and evaluate the arguments for and against their inclusion in contemporary elections.
=== page 119 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1899 Grade 12 Government
u1900 10b Assess the impact of political parties on citizens and elected officials, including the increase of political polarization, rise of independent voters, and disillusionment with party systems.
u1901 CITIZENSHIP AND CIVIC RESPONSIBILITIES
u1902 (x=41) 11 Analyze the electoral process, focusing on election laws and systems at the national, state, and local levels, and explain their constitutional underpinnings, practical implementation, and effects on voter participation and representation in democratic governance.
u1903 (x=109) Examples: Electoral College, primary system
u1904 11b Outline how the Electoral College functions and explain how candidates must appeal to a wide variety of states and develop coalitions in order to secure the electoral votes required to win the presidency.
u1905 11b Evaluate the effects of reapportionment, redistricting, and gerrymandering on congressional elections.
u1906 (x=41) 12 Describe the rights and duties of citizens, including participation in the election process.
u1907 (x=109) Examples: due process, freedom of assembly, right to a speedy trial, jury duty
u1908 (x=45) 12a Explain why maintaining a balance between individual rights and majority rule and between state and national power is important for the functioning of the United States government.
u1909 (x=109) Examples: freedom of religion, freedom of the press, majority rule and minority rights, right to a fair trial, state and national authority in a federal system
u1910 LOCAL AND STATE GOVERNMENT
u1911 13 Outline how the federal system of the United States divides powers between national and state governments.
u1912 (x=45) 13a Compare specific functions, organizations, and purposes of local and state governments.
u1913 (x=109) Examples: executing fiscal and monetary policies, ensuring personal security, regulating transportation
u1914 (x=44) 13b Describe the role of the national government in regulating and facilitating relations among states in the United States.
u1915 (x=109) Examples: commerce regulation, dispute resolution, federal enforcement of interstate laws, full faith and credit clause, interstate compacts, privileges and immunities clause
u1916 13c Analyze how Dillon's Rule and Home Rule provisions in Alabama's 1901 Constitution affect local funding procedures and regulations.
u1917 14 Analyze and interpret the concept of tribal sovereignty, its historical background, and its significance for Native American tribes in the United States, with a particular focus on tribes from Alabama.
=== page 120 === [running header: Grade 12 | 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1920 Grade 12 Economics
u1921 Economics
u1923 Economics is a required, half-credit course paired with United States Government (also half-credit) to provide twelfth grade students with a deeper understanding of the systems, processes, and institutions that shape modern life. Economics is designed to help students understand how economies function, recognize economic and social problems, and evaluate the costs and benefits of choices. Key elements of the course include the study of scarcity, supply and demand, trade, market structures, money and the role of financial institutions, and the role of government. Mastering the knowledge and skills in this course enables students to anticipate changes in economic conditions and take appropriate action to improve their own lives and society as a whole.
u1924 Course Topics: 1. Fundamental Economic Concepts 2. American Market Economy 3. Government in Economics 4. Global Economy
u1925 LOOKING BACK, LOOKING AHEAD: By twelfth grade, students have completed both their world history and geography sequence and their United States history sequence, taking these studies through the end of the twentieth and into the twenty-first century. Examining the historical forces that have shaped economics and government prepares students to learn how these systems operate today.
u1926 [T1 R1 C1] SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u1927 [T1 R2 C1] The two sets of skills outlined below help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in college, career, and civic life: disciplinary thinking skills and social studies practices. The development of disciplinary thinking is foundational to a successful, engaging experience in social studies education. The disciplines are color-coded to show their alignment with disciplinary connection standards. Each practice in the left column of the table below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they engage in disciplinary thinking in social studies?”
u1928 [T1 R3 C2] ● Evaluate how political and economic decisions throughout time have influenced cultural and environmental characteristics of various places and regions. ● Evaluate the impact of economic activities and political decisions on spatial patterns within and among urban, suburban and rural regions. ● Evaluate how economic globalization and the expanding use of scarce resources contribute to conflict and cooperation among countries. ● Evaluate the consequences of human-made and natural catastrophes on global trade, politics, and human migration.
=== page 121 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1931 Grade 12 Economics
u1932 [T1 R1 C2] ● Analyze and utilize data to evaluate costs and benefits. ● Identify and analyze data to assess economic (or financial) well-being. ● Analyze and create charts, graphs, and infographics to illustrate economic conditions. ● Utilize acquired knowledge to engage in the marketplace through informed decision-making.
u1933 [T1 R2 C2] ● Evaluate how historical developments were shaped by unique circumstances of time and place as well as broader historical contexts. ● Detect possible limitations in various kinds of historical evidence and differing secondary interpretations. ● Analyze the multiple, complex causes and effects of events in the past.
u1934 [T1 R3 C2] ● Critique relationships among governments, civil societies, and economic markets. ● Evaluate multiple procedures for making governmental decisions at the local, state, national, and international levels in terms of the economic purposes achieved. ● Evaluate public policies in terms of intended and unintended outcomes and related consequences.
u1935 The areas of disciplinary thinking and corresponding skills outlined above provide the tools for students to explore course content at a greater depth and establish a deeper understanding. In addition, the following social studies practices develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom.
u1936 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
u1937 [T2 R1 C2] ● Gather relevant information from multiple sources representing a wide range of views, using the origin, authority, structure, context, and corroborative value of the sources to guide the selection. ● Evaluate the credibility of a source by examining how experts value the source.
=== page 122 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1940 Grade 12 Economics
u1941 [T1 R1 C2] ● Critique the use of reasoning, sequencing, and supporting details of explanations. ● Use disciplinary and interdisciplinary lenses to understand the characteristics and causes of local, regional, and global problems; instances of such problems in multiple contexts; and the challenges and opportunities faced by those trying to address those problems over time and place. ● Assess options for individual and collective actions to address local, regional, and global problems by engaging in self-reflection, strategy identification, and complex causal reasoning. ● Present arguments and explanations that feature ideas and perspectives on economic issues and topics to reach a range of audiences, using print, oral, and digital technologies.
u1942 (x=262) ECONOMICS CONTENT STANDARDS
u1943 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8.
u1944 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u1945 FUNDAMENTAL ECONOMIC CONCEPTS
u1947 Investigate and share information on how scarcity can impact factors of production and the decision-making of individuals, businesses, and governments.
u1948 1a Explain the relationship between scarcity as a basic condition of economics and the decision-making needed to allocate limited resources.
u1949 1b Explain how land (natural resource), labor (human resource), capital (physical or human resource), and entrepreneurship function as factors of production.
u1950 2 Compare marginal benefits and marginal costs of an action, using rational decision-making.
u1951 2a Analyze how changes in opportunity costs impact the rational decision-making of individuals, businesses, and governments.
u1952 2b Illustrate and explain how rational decision-making involves the consideration of trade-offs and opportunity costs.
u1953 Example: Utilize a production-possibilities curve to examine opportunity costs.
u1954 3 Compare the methods that various economic systems use to allocate goods and services.
u1955 3a Describe the key elements of command, market, and mixed economic systems.
u1956 3b Research and share information illustrating how different economic systems answer the basic economic questions of what to produce, how to produce, and for whom to produce.
u1957 3c Compare the ways that different economic systems address competition, consumer sovereignty, government regulation, private ownership, and profit motive.
=== page 123 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1960 Grade 12 Economics
u1961 [T1 R1 C1] AMERICAN MARKET ECONOMY
u1962 [T1 R2 C1] 4 Draw conclusions about how supply, demand, and price interact in a market economy.
u1963 [T1 R3 C1] 4a Utilize circular flow diagrams to illustrate and explain the operation of the product market; the operation of the factor market; the real flow of goods and services between and among businesses, households, and government; and the flow of money.
u1964 [T1 R4 C1] 4b Apply the law of supply and demand to everyday consumer and business decisions.
u1965 [T1 R5 C1] 4c Explain how prices serve as incentives in a market economy, and how factors other than price cause changes in supply and demand.
u1966 [T1 R6 C1] 4d Illustrate and explain how supply and demand determine equilibrium price and quantity and how price movements eliminate shortages and surpluses. Example: Utilize a graph to show the interaction of supply and demand in a given industry.
u1967 [T1 R7 C1] 5 Compare and contrast types of business firms, including sole proprietorships, partnerships, and corporations.
u1968 [T1 R8 C1] 5a Evaluate the role of profit as an incentive for short- and long-term decisions by corporations, partnerships, and sole proprietorships.
u1969 [T1 R9 C1] 5b Distinguish among the levels of competition that exist in market and mixed economic systems, including pure competition, monopoly, monopolistic competition, and oligopoly. Example: Explain how firms engage in price and non-price competition, providing real-world examples.
u1970 [T1 R10 C1] 5c Research and present information on the role and impact of economic institutions on state and national economies, including labor unions and nonprofit organizations.
u1971 [T1 R11 C1] 6
u1972 [T1 R11 C2] Analyze data to describe the shifting demographics of the labor force of the United States in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, including age, education, gender, race, regional specialization, and socioeconomic background.
u1973 [T1 R12 C1] 6a Explain how the characteristics of the labor force influence wages and non-wage benefits and affect economic growth.
u1974 [T1 R13 C1] 6b Explain how the supply and demand of labor influence wage and non-wage benefits and affect economic growth.
=== page 124 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u1977 Grade 12 Economics
u1978 [T1 R1 C1] GOVERNMENT IN ECONOMICS
u1979 [T1 R2 C1] 7
u1980 [T1 R2 C2] Analyze the role of government in a market economy.
u1981 [T1 R3 C1] 7a
u1982 [T1 R3 C2] Research and explain ways the government influences the economy, including promoting and securing competition, protecting private property rights, distributing resources, providing public goods and services, resolving externalities and other perceived market failures, and stabilizing growth in the economy.
u1983 7b Assess how government regulation and deregulation affect consumers and producers.
u1984 [T2 R1 C1] 7c Explain how the budgetary categories of government revenue and expenditures impact the collection of taxes and the distribution of resources.
u1985 [T2 R2 C1] 8 Explain how economic measurements, including the Consumer Price Index (CPI), the Gross Domestic Product (GDP), inflation rates, labor force participation rate, and unemployment figures, are used to assess the overall economic health of the country.
u1986 [T2 R3 C1] 8a Analyze how spending and production decisions made by households, businesses, and government determine overall levels of income, employment, and prices.
u1987 [T2 R4 C1] 8b Compare and contrast structural, cyclical, and frictional unemployment.
u1988 [T2 R5 C1] 8c Describe the stages of the business cycle and explain how employment and inflation change during those stages.
u1989 [T2 R6 C1] 8d
u1990 [T2 R6 C2] Explain how unemployment and inflation affect individuals and nations, citing specific examples.
u1991 [T2 R7 C1] 9
u1992 [T2 R7 C2] Explain how fiscal and monetary policy influence price stability, employment, and economic growth, citing examples from the past hundred years.
u1993 [T2 R8 C1] 9a Explain how the United States Federal Reserve System regulates the banking system and uses its tools of monetary policy through an ample reserve system to achieve its economic goals.
u1994 [T2 R9 C1] 9b
u1995 [T2 R9 C2] Describe how Congress and state legislatures use fiscal policy to achieve their economic, social, and political goals, including taxing, spending, grants, and mandates.
u1996 [T2 R10 C1] 9c
u1997 [T2 R10 C2] Correlate fluctuations in government deficits over time to the extent of national debt during those periods. Examples: Great Depression, World War II, 2001 recession, War on Terror, Great Recession, COVID pandemic
=== page 125 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2000 Grade 12 Economics
u2001 GLOBAL ECONOMY
u2002 10 Analyze the factors that determine and shape a country’s standard of living.
u2003 [T1 R1 C1] 10a Explain how the relationship between inputs and outputs is used to calculate productivity at various levels of the economy. Examples: individual, corporate, national, sector
u2004 [T1 R2 C1] 10b Explain how investments in education, equipment, factories, healthcare, new technology, and training promote economic growth and enhance living standards.
u2005 [T1 R3 C1] 10c Research and share information on how Alabama and the United States relate to the global economy in terms of current technological innovations and technology-based industries.
u2006 [T1 R4 C1] 11
u2007 [T1 R4 C2] Explain why individuals, businesses, and nations engage in trading goods and services in the global economy.
u2008 [T1 R5 C1] 11a Contrast absolute advantage to comparative advantage, and explain how they are used to measure gains from trade.
u2009 [T1 R6 C1] 11b Locate and utilize current economic data to demonstrate how changes in exchange rates impact the purchasing power of individuals and businesses.
u2010 [T1 R7 C1] 11c Analyze why countries sometimes impose trade barriers and sometimes engage in free trade. Examples: embargoes, regulations, subsidies, tariffs, quotas
u2011 [T1 R8 C1] 11d Construct and explain examples of specialization and exchange.
=== page 126 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2014 Psychology
u2015 Psychology High School Elective
u2016 Grade Level: Grades 9-12
u2017 (x=41) Course Credit: 0.5 (Standards 1, 1a, 1b, 1c, 2, 2b, 2c, 3, 4, 5, 5a, 5d, 11, 15, 16, 18, 18a, 19a, indicated with
u2018 (x=122) an asterisk, are required)
u2019 OR 1.0 (All standards are required)
u2020 Psychology introduces the basic concepts of psychology and allows students to explore human behavior, social interactions, and biology of the brain. Throughout the course, students will delve into theories, findings from research, and practical applications aimed at understanding human behavior. The content allows students to gain insight into why people think, feel, and behave the way they do, and how psychologists investigate these processes.
u2021 The study of psychology requires a flexible, investigative classroom environment which allows for project-based learning, including small- and large-group discussions, in-depth projects, and research activities. Students are encouraged to use critical-thinking skills as they apply knowledge of the brain and its functioning to understanding human behavior.
u2022 Course Topics: 1. Introduction to Psychology 2. Biological Basis of Psychology 3. Cognitive Psychology 4. Clinical Psychology
u2023 SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u2024 Each practice listed in the left column of the table below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are age-appropriate ways for students to carry out the overarching social studies practices to which they are related. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
u2025 [T1 R1 C2] ● Collect and analyze data designed to answer a psychological question, using basic descriptive and inferential statistics. ● Explain how the validity and reliability of observations and measurements relate to data analysis. ● Use information from different psychological sources to generate research questions.
=== page 127 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2028 Psychology
u2029 [T1 R1 C2] ● Use psychological knowledge to promote healthy lifestyle choices. ● Discuss ways in which the applications of psychological science can address domestic and global issues. ● Suggest psychologically-based ethical solutions to actual problems including, but not limited to, those encountered in education, business and industry, and the environment.
u2030 (x=256) PSYCHOLOGY CONTENT STANDARDS
u2031 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8. Standards with asterisks are required to be taught in a half-credit course.
u2032 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u2033 INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGY
u2035 Trace the development of psychology as a scientific discipline, including its evolution from other fields of study.*
u2036 [T2 R1 C1] 1a
u2037 [T2 R1 C2] Investigate and describe the history of psychology from its beginning to the modern era, including key contributors to the field.* Examples: Daniel Kahneman, Elizabeth Loftus, Francis Sumner, G. Stanley Hall, Mary Whiton Calkins, Wilhem Wundt
u2038 [T2 R2 C1] 1b
u2039 [T2 R2 C2] Differentiate among various schools of thought and perspectives that have developed in psychology since 1879.* Examples: behaviorism, cognitive, humanistic, neuroscience, socio-cultural
u2040 1c Describe how modern psychologists utilize multiple perspectives to understand behavior and mental processes, citing examples.*
u2041 (x=41) 2 Describe methodologies, research tools, and strategies used by researchers in psychological studies.*
u2042 (x=109) Examples: case studies, cross-sectional studies, longitudinal studies, naturalistic observations, surveys
u2043 2a Contrast the roles of independent, dependent, and confounding variables and the functions of control and experimental groups within the scientific method.
u2044 2b Identify and explain systematic procedures necessary for conducting an experiment and improving the validity of results.*
u2045 2c Describe the role of the American Psychological Association in setting ethical guidelines regarding the use of human and animal subjects in psychological research.*
=== page 128 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2048 Psychology
u2050 Describe various careers pursued by psychologists, including medical and mental health care fields, the business world, education, law and criminal justice, and research.*
u2051 BIOLOGICAL BASIS OF PSYCHOLOGY
u2053 Compare the effects of heredity and environment on development and behavior.*
u2055 Describe the structure, biochemistry, and circuitry of the brain and nervous system, and explain their roles in human behavior and mental processes.*
u2056 Examples: central nervous system, peripheral nervous system, somatic nervous system
u2057 5a Describe communication between neurons and the electrochemical process, including the role of neurotransmitters in behavior.*
u2058 5b Explain the effect of neurotransmitters on human behavior and compare the effects of drugs and toxins on the brain.
u2059 5c Describe the specialized and interdependent functions of sections of the brain, including the lobes and hemispheres of the cerebral cortex.
u2060 5d Describe technologies used to study the brain and nervous system.* Examples: CAT, EEG, fMRI, MRI, PET
u2061 5e Explain how psychoactive drugs affect people, including the mechanisms of addiction, tolerance, and withdrawal.
u2062 6 Explain how behavior genetics has contributed to the understanding of behavior and mental processes, including differentiating among deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), chromosomes, and genes and identifying effects of chromosomal abnormalities.
u2063 7 Describe the interconnected processes of sensation and perception.
u2064 7a Explain the role of sensory systems in human behavior.
u2065 7b Explain how perceiving can differ from sensing, including how attention and environmental cues can impact what is perceived and what is sensed.
u2066 7c Explain perception in terms of Gestalt principles and concepts.
u2067 (x=41) 8 Compare theories about the functions of sleep and of dreaming.
u2068 (x=109) Examples: activation synthesis theory, adaptive theory, energy conservation theory, restorative theory
=== page 129 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2071 Psychology
u2072 COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY
u2074 Describe cognitive, physical, and social development across the human lifespan, citing theories of Carol Gilligan, Erik H. Erikson, Jean Piaget, and Lawrence Kohlberg.
u2075 10 Explain the importance and processes of memory, including how information is encoded and stored, the use of mnemonic devices, and how schemas influence memory construction and retrieval.
u2076 10a Compare ways memories are stored in the brain, including episodic and procedural, and explain how information is retrieved, reconstructed, or misremembered.
u2077 11 Describe ways in which organisms learn, including the processes of classical conditioning, operant conditioning, and observational learning.*
u2078 11a Identify and describe unconditioned stimuli, conditioned stimuli, unconditioned responses, and conditioned responses.
u2079 11b Explain the law of effect, and differentiate between reinforcement and punishment, positive and negative reinforcement, and various schedules of reinforcement.
u2080 11c Describe original experiments conducted by Albert Bandura, B. F. Skinner, Ivan Pavlov, John B. Watson, Kenneth and Mamie Clark, and Rosalie Rayner.
u2081 12 Explain processes involved in problem-solving and decision-making, including cognitive processes related to thinking and concept formation.
u2082 12a Explain the role of mental images and verbal symbols in the thought process.
u2083 13 Describe methods of assessing individual differences and theories of intelligence, including Charles E. Spearman's general (g) factor of intelligence, Howard Gardner's multiple intelligences, and Robert J. Sternberg's triarchic theory of intelligence.
u2084 13a Describe different types of intelligence tests and explain the Flynn effect.
u2085 13b Summarize concerns regarding the reliability and validity of intelligence test scores and describe the historical use and misuse of intelligence tests.
u2086 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
u2087 14 Explain the role of personality development in human behavior and differentiate among theories that seek to explain this development.
u2088 14a Describe different measures of personality, including the Neuroticism-Extroversion-Openness Personality Inventory (NEO-PI), the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), and projective tests.
u2089 15 Explain the role of motivation and emotion in human behavior.*
=== page 130 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2092 Psychology
u2093 15a Describe theories that explain how biological, cognitive, and social factors influence motivation, including Abraham Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, arousal theory, and the theory drive for hunger (homeostasis).
u2094 15b Describe situational cues that cause emotions, including anger, curiosity, and anxiety.
u2095 16 Describe major psychological disorders and their treatments and explain how examples of abnormal behavior differ from normal behavior.*
u2096 16a Describe various approaches for explaining mental illness, including biological and medical, cognitive, and sociocultural models.
u2097 16b Differentiate among types of mental illness, including mood, anxiety, somatoform, schizophrenic, dissociative, and personality disorders.
u2098 17 Describe how attitudes, conditions of obedience and conformity, and other influences affect actions and shape human behavior, including actor-observer, self-server, social facilitation, social loafing, bystander effect, groupthink, and group polarization.
u2099 17a Critique the ethical issues found in Stanley Milgram's work with obedience and S. E. Asch's work with conformity.
u2100 18 Summarize ways to promote psychological wellness.*
u2101 18a Identify sources of stress across the human lifespan and explain the physiological and psychological consequences of stress for health and wellness.*
u2102 18b Explain physiological, cognitive, and behavioral strategies to deal with stress, and contrast positive and negative ways of coping with stress.
u2103 19 Describe different types of biomedical and psychological treatments for mental disorders.
u2104 19a Explain how mental health professionals determine the appropriate treatment from the variety of psychological treatments available for various mental health issues and disorders.*
u2105 19b Identify differences among licensed mental health providers and outline legal and ethical requirements for mental health providers.
u2106 19c Explain the significance of Wyatt v. Stickney (1972) and explain how the Wyatt Standards improved mental health codes and federal regulations regarding the treatment of mental disorders.
=== page 131 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2109 Sociology
u2110 Sociology High School Elective
u2111 Grade Level: Grades 9-12
u2112 (x=41) Course Credit: 0.5 (Standards 1, 1a, 2, 2a, 2b, 3, 4, 4c, 5, 6, 6b, 7, 7a, 8a, 8b, 10, 10b, 11, 11a, and 11c,
u2113 (x=145) marked with an asterisk, are required) OR 1.0 (All standards are required)
u2114 Sociology introduces the study of human society, focusing on the formation and actions of human groups. A general overview of sociology includes topics such as socialization, group dynamics, and social change. These topics require students to possess a general knowledge of the world in which they live and an understanding of how individuals interact in various kinds of groups. To address issues involved in living together in societal groups, students examine the importance of tolerance and respect for others and are challenged to research and discuss influences of demographics, genetics, personal behaviors, and religion upon society.
u2115 Course Topics:
u2116 1. Sociology Overview 2. Self and Socialization 3. Groups and Socialization 4. Social Issues and Social Change
u2117 SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u2118 The two sets of skills outlined below help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in college, career, and civic life: disciplinary thinking skills and social studies practices. The development of disciplinary thinking is foundational to a successful, engaging experience in social studies education. The disciplines are color-coded to show their alignment with disciplinary connection standards.
u2119 Each practice in the left column of the table below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they engage in disciplinary thinking in social studies?”
u2120 [T1 R1 C2] ● Analyze relationships and interactions within and between human and physical systems to explain reciprocal influences that occur among them. ● Analyze how relationships between humans and environments extend or contract spatial patterns of settlement and movement.
=== page 132 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2123 Sociology
u2124 [T1 R1 C2] ● Analyze how incentives influence choices that may result in policies with varied costs and benefits for different groups. ● Explain how current economic trends and policies affect economic growth, labor markets, rights of citizens, and the distribution of resources and income.
u2125 [T1 R2 C2] ● Analyze how historical contexts shaped and continue to shape people’s perspectives. ● Use questions generated about individuals and groups to assess how the significance and perception of their actions change over time and are shaped by the historical context. ● Evaluate how historical events and developments were shaped by unique circumstances of time and place as well as broader historical contexts.
u2126 [T1 R3 C2] ● Evaluate the effectiveness of citizens and institutions in addressing social and political problems at the local, state, tribal, national, and/or international level. ● Evaluate social and political systems that promote civic virtues and enact democratic principles in different contexts, times, and places. ● Analyze historical, contemporary, and emerging means of changing societies, promoting the common good, and protecting rights.
u2127 The areas of disciplinary thinking and corresponding skills outlined above provide the tools for students to explore course content at a greater depth and establish a deeper understanding. In addition, the following social studies practices develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom.
u2128 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
u2129 [T2 R1 C2] ● Collect and analyze data designed to answer a sociological question, using basic descriptive and inferential statistics. ● Explain how the validity and reliability of observations and measurements relate to data analysis. ● Use information from different sources to generate research questions.
=== page 133 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2132 Sociology
u2133 [T1 R1 C2] ● Assess individual and collective capacities to take action to address local, regional, and global problems, taking into account a range of possible levers of power, strategies, and potential outcomes. ● Draw on multiple disciplinary lenses to analyze how a specific problem can manifest itself at local, regional, and global levels over time, identifying its characteristics and causes, and the challenges and opportunities faced by those trying to address the problem.
u2134 (x=263) SOCIOLOGY CONTENT STANDARDS
u2135 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8. Standards with asterisks are required to be taught in a half-credit course.
u2136 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u2137 SOCIOLOGY OVERVIEW
u2139 Describe the development of sociology as a social science field of study.*
u2140 [T2 R1 C1] 1a
u2141 [T2 R1 C2] Explain the contributions of important figures in the field of sociology, including Émile Durkheim, George Herbert Mead, Karl Marx, Max Weber, and W.E.B. Du Bois.*
u2142 [T2 R2 C1] 1b Identify and explain tenets of sociology, including functional integration, power, social action, social structure, and culture.
u2143 [T2 R3 C1] 2 Explain methods and tools of research used by sociologists.*
u2144 [T2 R4 C1] 2a Differentiate between qualitative and quantitative research methods, giving examples of each.*
u2145 [T2 R5 C1] 2b Explain the usefulness of discerning and sharing insights into human behavior of individuals and groups.*
u2146 [T2 R6 C1] 3 Compare and contrast the three major sociological theories: functionalism, conflict theory, and symbolic interaction.*
u2147 [T2 R7 C1] 3a Apply the major sociological theories to a situation and evaluate the differences in interpretations.
=== page 134 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2150 Sociology
u2151 SELF AND SOCIALIZATION
u2153 Explain how values and norms influence individual behavior.*
u2154 [T1 R1 C1] 4a
u2155 [T1 R1 C2] Describe ways in which cultures differ, change, and resist change, including countercultures, subcultures, and ethnocentric beliefs.
u2156 4b Illustrate and explain key concepts and goals of socialization, including self-concept, looking-glass self, significant others, and role-taking.
u2157 [T2 R1 C1] 4c Describe the major agents of socialization and evaluate the role that each one plays.* Examples: family, government, mass media including social media, peer group, school
u2158 [T2 R2 C1] 5 Compare and contrast the phases of development in the human life cycle, including birth, childhood, adolescence, adulthood, parenthood, middle age, and late adulthood.*
u2159 [T2 R3 C1] 5a Explain the value of utilizing birth cohorts as a research device.
u2160 [T2 R4 C1] 5b Differentiate among primary, secondary, and adult socialization and identify the key influences of socialization for each stage.
u2161 [T2 R5 C1] 5c Investigate and explain the impact of psychological theories that influence sociology, including Erikson’s Psychosocial Development, Kohlberg’s Stages of Moral Development, Piaget’s Stages of Cognitive Development, and Vygotsky’s Sociocultural Theory.
u2162 [T2 R6 C1] 6 Identify and describe human behaviors that deviate from social norms.*
u2163 [T2 R7 C1] 6a Analyze deviance from each of the three sociological perspectives (interactionist, functional, and conflict).
u2164 [T2 R8 C1] 6b
u2165 [T2 R8 C2] Trace how society has reacted to deviant behaviors throughout history and explain the theoretical principles of punishment, including retributive, rehabilitative, and deterrent.*
u2166 GROUPS AND SOCIALIZATION
u2168 Analyze how different types of social groups can influence individual and group behavior.*
u2169 7a Compare and contrast types of groups and the reasons for group formation.*
u2170 [T3 R1 C1] 7b
u2171 [T3 R1 C2] Trace the development of various types of social groups from hunter-gatherer societies to the present day and explain how the importance of primary and secondary groups has changed over time.
u2172 [T3 R2 C1] 8
u2173 [T3 R2 C2] Explain the purpose of social systems and institutions, including governments, houses of worship, schools, and voluntary associations.
=== page 135 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2176 Sociology
u2177 8a Compare how authority is perceived in legitimate power and coercive power leadership styles. *
u2178 8b Differentiate among Weber’s three types of authority (charismatic, rational-legal, and traditional) in respect to source of power and leadership style.*
u2179 9 Describe the structure and function of family units, including traditional, extended, nuclear, single-parent, and blended families, and describe the roles of parent, child, and spouse within each type.
u2180 9a Compare and contrast biological family with found or chosen family and develop an argument regarding why a person may select one over the other.
u2181 SOCIAL ISSUES AND SOCIAL CHANGE
u2182 10 Explain the relationship between social stratification and social class, including status ascription versus achievement, intergenerational social mobility, and structural occupational change.*
u2183 [T1 R1 C1] 10a Identify common patterns of social stratification in American society.
u2184 [T1 R2 C1] 10b Analyze the impact of social stratification on groups and individuals.*
u2185 [T1 R3 C1] 11 Explain why social movements form, and identify the factors that produce large-scale social change as a result of these movements.*
u2186 [T1 R4 C1] 11a Compare and contrast the major theories of collective behavior, including contagion theory, convergence theory, and emergent norm theory.*
u2187 [T1 R5 C1] 11b
u2188 [T1 R5 C2] Describe how social movements, including the Civil Rights Movement, have created change throughout the history of the United States.
u2189 [T1 R6 C1] 11c Explain the role of social institutions in fostering change and reinforcing stratification.*
=== page 136 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2192 Contemporary World Issues
u2193 Contemporary World Issues
u2194 High School Elective
u2195 Grade Level: Grades 9-12
u2196 (x=41) Course Credit: 0.5 (All standards are required) OR
u2197 (x=122) 1.0 (All standards are required)
u2198 Contemporary World Issues is designed to acquaint students with current events of international interest and examine the relationship of the United States to these events. Knowing about and analyzing key contemporary events is vital to students’ educational development as they prepare for their roles as responsible and informed citizens. While daily and weekly news sources serve as primary references for the content of this course, students also examine current issues from historical and geographical perspectives, using a variety of resources and looking beyond presentations given in the media. Students evaluate news for content, fact, opinion, reliability, and validity and analyze different elements of news sources to develop an understanding of events and issues. Mastering the content standards in this course requires students to investigate issues in depth, using a variety of strategies that actively engage them. A classroom environment that incorporates discussion, research, and problem-solving projects enhances the development of democratic ideals and citizenship and facilitates the learning of content in this area.
u2199 Course Topics: 1. Media Literacy 2. International Relations 3. World Events and Issues 4. Issue Resolution
u2200 SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u2201 The two sets of skills outlined below help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in college, career, and civic life: disciplinary thinking skills and social studies practices. The development of disciplinary thinking is foundational to a successful, engaging experience in social studies education. The disciplines are color-coded to show their alignment with disciplinary connection standards.
u2202 Each practice in the left column of the table below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they engage in disciplinary thinking in social studies?”
u2203 [T1 R1 C2] ● Use maps, satellite images, photographs, and other representations to explain relationships between the locations of places and regions and their political, cultural, and economic dynamics. ● Use geographic data to analyze variations in the spatial patterns of cultural and environmental characteristics at multiple scales. ● Evaluate how economic globalization and the expanding use of scarce resources contribute to conflict and cooperation within and among countries.
=== page 137 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2206 Contemporary World Issues
u2207 [T1 R1 C2] ● Analyze how incentives influence choices that may result in policies with a range of costs and benefits for different groups. ● Use marginal benefits and marginal costs to construct an argument for or against an approach or solution to an economic issue. ● Explain why advancements in technology and investments in capital goods and human capital increase economic growth and standards of living.
u2208 [T1 R2 C2] ● Analyze how historical contexts shaped and continue to shape people’s perspectives. ● Analyze the multiple, complex causes and effects of events. ● Distinguish between long-term causes and triggering events when developing an argument.
u2209 [T1 R3 C2] ● Use appropriate deliberative processes in multiple settings. ● Evaluate public policies in terms of intended and unintended outcomes and related consequences. ● Evaluate multiple procedures for making governmental decisions.
u2210 The areas of disciplinary thinking and corresponding skills outlined above provide the tools for students to explore course content at a greater depth and establish a deeper understanding. In addition, the following social studies practices develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom.
u2211 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
u2212 [T2 R1 C2] ● Evaluate the credibility of a source by examining how experts value the source. ● Gather relevant information from multiple sources representing a wide range of views, using the origin, authority, structure, context, and corroborative value of the sources to assess their usefulness. ● Refine claims and counterclaims, attending to the precision, significance, and knowledge they convey while pointing out the strengths and limitations of both. ● Identify evidence that draws information directly and substantively from multiple sources to detect inconsistencies in evidence in order to revise or strengthen claims.
=== page 138 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2215 Contemporary World Issues
u2216 [T1 R1 C2] ● Construct arguments using precise and knowledgeable claims with evidence from multiple sources, while acknowledging counterclaims and evidentiary weaknesses. ● Use disciplinary and interdisciplinary lenses to understand the characteristics and causes of local, regional, and global problems; instances of such problems in multiple contexts; and challenges and opportunities faced by those trying to address these problems over time and place. ● Assess options to address regional and global problems by engaging in self-reflection, strategy identification, and complex, causal reasoning.
u2217 CONTEMPORARY WORLD ISSUES
u2218 (x=227) CONTENT STANDARDS
u2219 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8.
u2220 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u2221 MEDIA LITERACY
u2223 Explain how cultural, geographic, political, and social points of view can influence media descriptions of current international events.
u2224 [T2 R1 C1] 1a Compare and contrast how several sources cover the same events and explain how their varied perspectives influence audience perceptions about the events themselves.
u2225 [T2 R2 C1] 1b Describe the impact of current news stories and the issues they present on the individual and on local, national, and international communities.
u2226 [T2 R3 C1] 1c Relate current news stories to past events and broader historical trends.
u2227 [T2 R4 C1] 1d
u2228 [T2 R4 C2] Locate on a map the areas affected by events reported in national and international news stories.
u2229 [T2 R5 C1] 2 Compare the presentation of world events in various media, including cable news services, international news sources, Internet news sources, network television, print, public broadcasting, and social media.
u2230 [T2 R6 C1] 2a Explain how to determine the reliability of news stories and their sources.
u2231 [T2 R7 C1] 2b Describe the use and misuse of different media platforms, including the use of social media and artificial intelligence (AI).
u2232 [T2 R8 C1] 2c Critique viewpoints presented in cable news commentary, editorials, political cartoons, and social media algorithms.
u2233 [T2 R9 C1] 3 Explain how public opinion polling is implemented, and describe how polling methods can produce intentional and unintentional bias and flawed samplings.
=== page 139 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2236 Contemporary World Issues
u2237 3a Interpret statistics included in current news stores related to political, social, and economic issues. Examples: analyze bar graphs, critique public polling data
u2238 [T1 R1 C1] INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
u2239 [T1 R2 C1] 4
u2240 [T1 R2 C2] Compare and contrast the functions and powers of United States government entities which shape official responses to international issues and events. Examples: congressional committees, International Trade Administration, National Security Council, United States Department of Defense, United States Department of State
u2241 [T1 R3 C1] 4a
u2242 [T1 R3 C2] Explain how foreign policy is created, how it can be influenced, and how it can be limited. Examples: public opinion, separation of powers, War Powers Act
u2243 [T1 R4 C1] 4b Describe the various roles and functions of the modern American military. Examples: deterrence, humanitarian aid, military intervention, peacekeeping
u2244 [T1 R5 C1] 5 Describe the roles of international governmental organizations (IGOs) and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in addressing international issues and crises.
u2245 [T1 R6 C1] 5a Explain the structure and roles of the United Nations and its specialized agencies and programs. Examples: International Monetary Fund, UNICEF, World Food Programme
u2246 [T1 R7 C1] 5b Explain the benefits and limitations of non-government entities resolving international events and crises. Examples: benefits - disaster relief from Red Cross and Red Crescent, food aid from World Central Kitchen; limitations - lack of financial resources to fund large scale operations, lack of interagency coordination
u2247 6 Evaluate the extent to which nations have successfully collaborated to achieve broad international goals, citing specific instances.
u2248 [T2 R1 C1] 6a
u2249 [T2 R1 C2] Describe the functions of modern-day alliance systems, regional organizations, and multinational corporations and cartels.
u2250 WORLD EVENTS AND ISSUES
u2251 7 Outline the causes and progressions of current conflicts around the world, including interstate, intrastate, and extrastate conflicts.
u2252 7a Investigate and explain how individuals and non-governmental groups may cause or perpetuate conflict, citing specific cases.
u2253 Examples: drug cartels, insurgents, terrorist organizations, transnational crime organizations
u2254 7b Formulate possible means to prevent and resolve modern conflicts.
=== page 140 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2257 Contemporary World Issues
u2258 [T1 R1 C1] 7c
u2259 [T1 R1 C2] Draw conclusions about the effects of conflicts on populations. Examples: destruction of infrastructure, disease, famine, refugee crises
u2260 [T1 R2 C1] 8 Identify and analyze recent incidents of human rights abuse across the world, utilizing a variety of sources. Examples: incidents - child labor, human trafficking; sources - Amnesty International, Equal Justice Initiative, United Nations Human Rights Office
u2261 [T1 R3 C1] 8a
u2262 [T1 R3 C2] Compare the individual rights, opportunities, and privileges of United States citizens to those of citizens of other countries. Examples: freedom of assembly, laws against discrimination, protection from arbitrary detention, women’s rights
u2263 [T1 R4 C1] 8b
u2264 [T1 R4 C2] Describe key rights and beliefs related to human rights as embedded in the Declaration of Independence, Geneva Conventions, and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
u2265 [T1 R5 C1] 8c
u2266 [T1 R5 C2] Critique how countries and international organizations respond to human rights violations, giving examples from recent history. Examples: Balkans, Bangladesh Liberation War, Cambodia Genocide, Rwanda Genocide
u2267 [T1 R6 C1] 9
u2268 [T1 R6 C2] Evaluate the impact of economic globalization on worldwide trends and on individual nations and regions.
u2269 [T1 R7 C1] 9a
u2270 [T1 R7 C2] Identify recurring historical patterns in economic development around the world.
u2271 [T1 R8 C1] 9b
u2272 [T1 R8 C2] Describe the costs and benefits of trade among nations in an interdependent world.
u2273 [T1 R9 C1] 9c
u2274 [T1 R9 C2] Compare ways in which different countries address individual needs, national economic problems, and social issues. Examples: economic regulation, food security, health care, national debt, taxation, unemployment
u2275 [T1 R10 C1] 10
u2276 [T1 R10 C2] Explain how scientific and technological changes impact the worldwide economy and the process of globalization. Examples: automation, economic specialization, improved communication
u2277 [T1 R11 C1] 10a
u2278 [T1 R11 C2] Evaluate the positive and negative impacts of scientific and technological changes on society and on the environment. Examples: alternative energy sources, conflict minerals, increased transport of goods
=== page 141 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2281 Contemporary World Issues
u2282 ISSUE RESOLUTION
u2283 (x=41) 11 Identify and describe strategies that facilitate public discussion on current events.
u2284 (x=109) Examples: debating various positions, participating in a social media campaign, presenting public forums, utilizing Robert’s Rules of Order, using a deliberative process
u2285 12 Research a current world issue or conflict and present information regarding its effects on the quality of life for individuals, groups, or countries.
u2286 12a Construct a possible solution to a global issue or conflict.
u2287 12b Describe means of implementing a possible solution to a global issue, analyzing its benefits and costs.
=== page 142 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2290 Human Geography
u2291 Human Geography
u2292 High School Elective
u2293 Grade Level: Grades 9-12
u2294 Course Credit: 1.0 (All standards are required)
u2295 Human Geography provides students with opportunities to explore a range of perspectives regarding the nature of human geography, including how human activities shape Earth’s surface. The course presents population characteristics, distribution and characteristics of cultural mosaics, spatial patterns of economic interaction, processes and patterns of human settlement, the division of the Earth’s surface, and the forces of cooperation and conflict. This course is designed to be taught with a thematic approach, using examples selected from a variety of places, regions, and countries.
u2296 Course Topics: 1. Geographic Principles 2. Culture and Geography 3. Migration and Settlement 4. Environment and the Economy
u2297 SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u2298 The two sets of skills outlined below help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in college, career, and civic life: disciplinary thinking skills and social studies practices. The development of disciplinary thinking is foundational to a successful, engaging experience in social studies education. The disciplines are color-coded to show their alignment with disciplinary connection standards.
u2299 Each practice in the left column of the table below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they engage in disciplinary thinking in social studies?”
u2300 [T1 R1 C2] ● Use geospatial and related technologies to create maps to display and explain the spatial patterns of cultural and environmental characteristics. ● Use maps, satellite images, photographs, and other representations to explain relationships between the locations of places and regions and their political, cultural, and economic dynamics. ● Use geographic data to analyze variations in the spatial patterns of cultural and environmental characteristics at multiple scales.
u2301 [T1 R2 C2] ● Analyze how incentives influence choices that may result in policies with a range of costs and benefits for different groups. ● Use marginal benefits and marginal costs to construct an argument for or against an approach or solution to an economic issue.
=== page 143 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2304 Human Geography
u2305 [T1 R1 C2] ● Analyze change and continuity in historical eras. ● Evaluate how historical events and developments were shaped by unique circumstances of time and place as well as broader historical contexts. ● Analyze the multiple, complex causes and effects of events in the past.
u2306 [T1 R2 C2] ● Evaluate social and political systems in different contexts, times, and places, which promote civic virtues and enact democratic principles. ● Evaluate public policies in terms of intended and unintended outcomes, and related consequences. ● Analyze historical, contemporary, and emerging means of changing societies, promoting the common good, and protecting rights.
u2307 The areas of disciplinary thinking and corresponding skills outlined above provide the tools for students to explore course content at a greater depth and establish a deeper understanding. In addition, the following social studies practices develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom.
u2308 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
u2309 [T2 R1 C2] ● Gather relevant information from multiple sources representing a wide range of views, using the origin, authority, structure, context, and corroborative value of the sources to guide the selection. ● Identify evidence that draws information directly and substantively from multiple sources to detect inconsistencies in evidence in order to revise or strengthen claims. ● Refine claims and counterclaims, attending to the precision, significance, and knowledge they convey while pointing out the strengths and limitations of both.
=== page 144 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2312 Human Geography
u2313 [T1 R1 C2] ● Construct explanations using sound reasoning, correct sequence (linear or nonlinear), examples, and details with significant and pertinent information and data. ● Assess options for individual and collective action to address regional and global problems by engaging in self-reflection, strategy identification, and complex causal reasoning. ● Use disciplinary and interdisciplinary lenses to understand the characteristics and causes of local, regional, and global problems; instances of such problems in multiple contexts; and challenges and opportunities faced by those trying to address these problems over time and place.
u2314 HUMAN GEOGRAPHY CONTENT STANDARDS
u2315 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u2316 GEOGRAPHIC PRINCIPLES
u2318 Differentiate among types of charts, graphs, infographics, and maps, and explain how different types of these illustrate data and trends.
u2319 Examples: maps - cartograms, choropleth maps, dot distribution maps, graduated symbol maps, isoline maps, political maps; charts - histogram, scatterplot, waterfall chart
u2321 Explain what constitutes a region and analyze relationships between regions.
u2322 (x=109) Examples: formal regions, functional regions, perceptual regions, world regions
u2324 Research spatial patterns of world populations to discern population distribution and explain reasons for these patterns.
u2325 CULTURE AND GEOGRAPHY
u2327 Identify the characteristics, diffusion, distribution, and complexity of Earth's cultural mosaics.
u2328 (x=109) Examples: contagious diffusion, hierarchical diffusion, relocation diffusion, stimulus diffusion
u2329 4a Identify and describe essential aspects of culture, including architecture, art, belief systems, customs, food, languages, religion, technology, and traditions.
u2330 Examples: a dastār to symbolize piety in the Sikh faith, sacral architecture, sand mandala
u2331 4b Differentiate between material and nonmaterial culture within a society, including folk customs.
u2332 4c Explain how music, dance, fashion, and art provide avenues for understanding the cultures from which they originate, both past and present.
u2333 Examples: a dashiki as an expression of respect for West Africa origins, a Fabergé egg as a symbol of affluence and excess, Kathakali as music and dance to tell Hindu stories
=== page 145 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2336 Human Geography
u2337 [T1 R1 C1] 5 Explain how the cultural landscape of a region reflects cultural traits, economic status, and preferences of its inhabitants. Examples: elaborate venues for sporting events, large number of structures for religious observances, multi-lane superhighways, presence of wind farms or coal-fired power plants
u2338 [T1 R2 C1] 5a Distinguish among various types of architecture based on their function, and explain how these may differ between rural and urban locations. Examples: commercial, defensive, educational, religious
u2339 [T1 R3 C1] 6 Explain the extent and forms of linguistic distribution around the world. Example: creoles, dialects, pidgins
u2340 [T1 R4 C1] 6a
u2341 [T1 R4 C2] Identify the world's most widely spoken languages and trace their origins and development.
u2342 [T1 R5 C1] 6b Develop an argument supporting the position that linguistic diversity creates both cultural richness and conflict. Examples: centrifugal and centripetal forces
u2343 [T1 R6 C1] 7 Describe ways religion influences cultures, citing examples from around the globe.
u2344 [T1 R7 C1] 7a Identify major religions, their places of origin, and areas of expansion.
u2345 [T1 R8 C1] 7b Compare and contrast ceremonies based on religious traditions in a variety of cultures, including marriages, funerals, and coming-of-age rituals.
u2346 [T1 R9 C1] 7c Explain how religion influences political views around the world.
u2347 [T1 R10 C1] 8 Compare and contrast the roles of men and women in societies around the world, including matrilineal and patrilineal societies.
u2348 [T2 R1 C1] MIGRATION AND SETTLEMENT
u2349 [T2 R2 C1] 9
u2350 [T2 R2 C2] Identify and explain world migration patterns caused by forced displacement throughout history. Examples: Rohingya refugee crisis, Syrian Civil War, Trail of Tears, transatlantic slave trade
u2351 [T2 R3 C1] 9a
u2352 [T2 R3 C2] Explain the causes and effects of the migration of various ethnic groups to the United States.
u2353 [T2 R4 C1] 9b
u2354 [T2 R4 C2] Explain the causes and consequences of migration within the United States ,citing historical examples.
u2355 [T2 R5 C1] 10 Describe patterns of settlement in different regions of the world. Examples: clustered or linear distribution, Land Ordinance 1785, long lot system
=== page 146 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2358 Human Geography
u2359 10a Evaluate the impact of long-term climate shifts and resource usage on human migration and settlement patterns.
u2360 (x=41) 11 Analyze how the economic and cultural activities of urban places shape surrounding regions.
u2361 (x=109) Examples: central place theory, gravity model, urban systems
u2362 11a Explain how urban sprawl affects a city, the communities around it, and the natural environment.
u2363 ENVIRONMENT AND THE ECONOMY
u2364 (x=41) 12 Explain how interaction between people and the environment affects culture in today's society.
u2365 (x=109) Examples: cultural ecology, environmental determinism, political ecology, possibilism
u2366 [T1 R1 C1] 13
u2367 [T1 R1 C2] Explain how resource availability and cultural practices influence agricultural methods, crop selection, and land-use patterns.
u2368 [T1 R2 C1] 13a
u2369 [T1 R2 C2] Describe how cultural diffusion and changes in technology have advanced agricultural methods over time. Examples: Blue Revolution, genetically modified foods (GMOs), Green Revolution, Second Agricultural Revolution
u2370 [T1 R3 C1] 14
u2371 [T1 R3 C2] Explain how economic interdependence and globalization impact countries and their populations. Examples: European Union, North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), supranationalism, United Nations
u2372 [T1 R4 C1] 14a
u2373 [T1 R4 C2] Trace the flow of commodities among regions of the world, explaining why patterns develop and identifying factors that might interrupt the transfer of goods.
u2374 [T1 R5 C1] 14b
u2375 [T1 R5 C2] Explain the advantages and disadvantages of global trade agreements for both people and countries.
=== page 147 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2378 Historical Studies
u2379 Historical Studies High School Elective
u2380 Grade Level: Grades 9-12
u2381 (x=41) Course Credit: 0.5 (All standards are required – the equivalent of half an academic year) OR
u2382 (x=122) 1.0 (All standards are required – one full academic year)
u2383 Historical Studies provides students the opportunity to explore and build in-depth knowledge of a historical topic of their choice. No matter what students find fascinating, from local Indigenous history to the study of the Civil Rights Movement, the standards are adaptable to those interests. Teachers may choose to construct the class around one topic, such as local history, or allow students to pursue their own interests. The course introduces students to historical methods and public history as they examine how the selected topic is presented and researched. Students pursue an extended inquiry related to the historical subject and undertake their own research, which culminates in a presentation of their findings. Overall, the course provides the flexibility to allow classes to pursue topics of interest and take part in the work of historians. Credit is granted based upon the length of the course.
u2384 Course Topics: 1. Subject Survey 2. Subject Research 3. Culminating Project
u2385 SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u2386 The two sets of skills outlined below help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in college, career, and civic life: disciplinary thinking skills and social studies practices. The development of disciplinary thinking is foundational to a successful, engaging experience in social studies education. The disciplines are color-coded to show their alignment with disciplinary connection standards.
u2387 Each practice in the left column of the table below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they engage in disciplinary thinking in social studies?”
u2388 [T1 R1 C2] ● Analyze the ways in which the perspectives of those writing history shaped the history that they produced. ● Analyze how current interpretations of the past are limited by the extent to which available historical sources represent the perspectives of people at the time. ● Analyze the relationship between historical sources and the secondary interpretations made from them. ● Detect possible limitations in various kinds of historical evidence and differing secondary interpretations.
=== page 148 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2391 Historical Studies
u2392 [T1 R1 C2] ● Apply civic virtues and democratic principles in school and community settings. ● Describe the roles of political, civil, and economic organizations in shaping people’s lives. ● Use appropriate deliberative processes in multiple settings.
u2393 The areas of disciplinary thinking and corresponding skills outlined above provide the tools for students to explore course content at a greater depth and establish a deeper understanding. In addition, the following social studies practices develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom.
u2394 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
u2395 [T2 R1 C2] ● Gather relevant information from multiple sources, using the origin, authority, structure, context, and corroborative value of the sources to guide the selection. ● Evaluate the credibility of a source by examining how experts value the source. ● Identify evidence that draws information directly and substantively from multiple sources to detect inconsistencies in evidence in order to revise or strengthen claims. ● Refine claims and counterclaims, attending to the precision, significance, and knowledge they convey while pointing out the strengths and limitations of both.
u2396 [T2 R2 C2] ● Critique the structure of explanations. ● Construct arguments using claims and evidence from multiple sources, while acknowledging the strengths and limitations of the arguments. ● Construct explanations using sound reasoning, correct sequence (linear or non-linear), examples, and details with significant and pertinent information and data, while acknowledging the strengths and weaknesses of the explanation given its purpose (e.g., cause and effect, chronological, procedural, technical). ● Present adaptations of arguments and explanations on topics of interest to others to reach audiences and venues outside the classroom, using print and oral technologies (e.g., posters, essays, letters, debates, speeches, reports, and maps) and digital technologies (e.g., Internet and digital documentary).
u2397 (x=230) HISTORICAL STUDIES CONTENT STANDARDS
u2398 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8.
u2399 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
=== page 149 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2402 Historical Studies
u2403 SUBJECT SURVEY
u2405 Describe how a selected historical subject is currently remembered or regarded, explaining how historical memory contributes to current thinking about the event.
u2406 1a Identify and explain examples of how the historical subject is currently represented. Examples: films, monuments, museums, textbooks
u2407 1b Explain factors that have influenced or shaped how the historical subject is viewed in modern day.
u2408 2 Analyze secondary sources related to the selected topic in history.
u2409 2a Describe the strengths and limitations of different types of secondary sources for providing insight into the selected historical subject.
u2410 2b Explain how a historian constructs a viewpoint on a historical subject.
u2411 2c Apply the concept of historiography through contrasting how various historians have interpreted the historical subject.
u2412 3 Explain how historic preservation has been or can be used to impact historical memory of the subject.
u2413 3a Describe different methods of historical preservation, and identify examples of these methods.
u2414 SUBJECT RESEARCH
u2415 4 Locate and utilize a variety of primary sources related to the selected historical subject.
u2416 4a Describe methods for collecting primary source evidence.
u2417 4b Compare and contrast the types of evidence provided by various primary sources. Examples: artifacts, diaries, government records, moving picture, photographs, places
u2418 4c Describe the strengths and limitations of different types of primary sources for providing insight into the selected historical subject.
u2419 5 Differentiate between primary and secondary sources on the subject and evaluate the quality of evidence each type yields.
u2420 (x=41) 6 Compare historical methods utilized for research and evaluate how these methods yield information regarding the selected historical subject.
u2421 (x=109) Examples: archaeology, archival research, genealogical research, oral history
=== page 150 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2424 Historical Studies
u2425 CULMINATING PROJECT
u2427 Construct and refine a research question to address an aspect of the subject that is not well-known or has not been widely reported, basing the question on their examination of literature and historiography of the subject.
u2429 Utilize various historical methods to acquire information on the selected subject and relate findings to the research question created.
u2430 8a Compare historical evidence to previous interpretations and corroborate salient facts and theories.
u2431 9 Present and defend the results of their interpretations and conclusions.
u2432 9a Describe ways in which public historians present history to audiences.
u2433 (x=50) 9b Evaluate the effectiveness of different methods of presenting historical findings to an audience.
u2434 (x=113) Examples: historic preservation, museum display, performance, podcast, public presentation, written summary
=== page 151 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2437 Holocaust Studies
u2438 Holocaust Studies High School Elective
u2439 Grade Level: Grades 9-12
u2440 (x=41) Course Credit: 0.5 (Standards 1, 2, 2b, 3a, 4, 4a, 4b, 5, 5a, 5c, 6, 6c, 7, 7b, 7c, 8, 9, 9a, 9c, 10, 11, 11b, 12,
u2441 (x=140) 13, 14, 15, 15a, 15d, 16, 16a, 17, 18, 19a, 20, 21, 21d, 22, and 22b are required) OR 1.0 (All standards are required)
u2442 Holocaust Studies provides students with an in-depth study of the Holocaust (the state-sponsored, systematic murder of Europe’s Jews) and the persecution and murder of millions of other “undesirables” by Nazi Germany. The course begins with a contextualization of the origins and impact of antisemitism, then examines the rise of Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party. Course standards focus heavily on the policies and decisions in the 1930s and 1940s that led to the extermination of six million Jews and millions of others by 1945. The course culminates with the aftermath of the mass killings and exploration of the concept of genocide.
u2443 Course Topics: 1. Antisemitism and Pre-War Jewish Life 2. The Rise of Hitler and the Nazis 3. Nazi Antisemitic and Racial Policies 4. The War in Europe 5. The Final Solution 6. Post-War
u2444 SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u2445 The two sets of skills outlined below help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in college, career, and civic life: disciplinary thinking skills and social studies practices. The development of disciplinary thinking is foundational to a successful, engaging experience in social studies education. The disciplines are color-coded to show their alignment with disciplinary connection standards.
u2446 Each practice in the left column of the table below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they engage in disciplinary thinking in social studies?”
u2447 [T1 R1 C2] ● Analyze the reciprocal nature of how historical events and the spatial diffusion of ideas, technologies, and cultural practices have influenced migration patterns and the distribution of human population. ● Use maps, satellite images, photographs, and other representations to explain relationships between the locations of places and regions and their political, cultural, and economic dynamics. ● Evaluate how political and economic decisions throughout time have influenced cultural and environmental characteristics of various places and regions.
=== page 152 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2450 Holocaust Studies
u2451 [T1 R1 C2] ● Analyze change and continuity in historical eras. ● Evaluate how historical events and developments were shaped by unique circumstances of time and place as well as broader historical contexts. ● Analyze the multiple, complex causes and effects of events in the past.
u2452 [T1 R2 C2] ● Evaluate social and political systems which promote civic virtues and enact democratic principles in different contexts, times, and places. ● Evaluate public policies in terms of intended and unintended outcomes and related consequences. ● Analyze historical, contemporary, and emerging means of changing societies, promoting the common good, and protecting rights.
u2453 The areas of disciplinary thinking and corresponding skills outlined above provide the tools for students to explore course content at a greater depth and establish a deeper understanding. In addition, the following social studies practices develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom.
u2454 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
u2455 [T2 R1 C2] ● Gather relevant information from multiple sources, using the origin, authority, structure, context, and corroborative value of the sources to guide the selection. ● Evaluate the credibility of a source by examining how experts value the source. ● Identify evidence that draws information directly and substantively from multiple sources to detect inconsistencies in evidence in order to revise or strengthen claims. ● Refine claims and counterclaims, attending to the precision, significance, and knowledge they convey while pointing out the strengths and limitations of both.
u2456 [T2 R2 C2] ● Critique the structure of explanations. ● Construct arguments using claims and evidence from multiple sources, while acknowledging the strengths and limitations of the arguments. ● Construct explanations using sound reasoning, correct sequence (linear or non-linear), examples, and details with significant and pertinent information and data, while acknowledging the strengths and weaknesses of the explanation given its purpose (e.g., cause and effect, chronological, procedural, technical). ● Present adaptations of arguments and explanations on topics of interest to others, using print and oral technologies (e.g., posters, essays, letters, debates, speeches, reports, and maps) and digital technologies (e.g., Internet and digital documentary).
=== page 153 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2459 Holocaust Studies
u2460 (x=230) HOLOCAUST STUDIES CONTENT STANDARDS
u2461 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8. Standards with asterisks are required to be taught in a half-credit course.
u2462 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u2463 ANTISEMITISM AND PRE-WAR JEWISH LIFE
u2465 Defend the definition of the Holocaust as the planned and systematic state-sponsored persecution and murder of European Jews by Nazi Germany and its collaborators between 1933 and 1945.*
u2467 Explain the origins and history of antisemitism.*
u2468 2a Identify core practices and tenets within historical and modern Judaism and analyze the historical and modern antisemitic beliefs about Jewish life and religion.
u2469 2b Analyze how the Nazi regime utilized and built on historical antisemitism to cast the Jewish people as a common enemy.*
u2470 2c Trace the intensification of antisemitism in the United States during the early twentieth century. Examples: Charles Lindbergh, Father Charles Coughlin, Henry Ford’s Dearborn Independent, lynching of Leo Frank
u2471 3 Describe cultural, economic, and social aspects of pre-war Jewish life in Europe and explain how these aspects differed across regions.
u2472 [T1 R1 C1] 3a
u2473 [T1 R1 C2] Locate on a map pre-war centers of Jewish life, including shtetls, in Europe in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.*
=== page 154 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2476 Holocaust Studies
u2477 THE RISE OF HITLER AND THE NAZIS
u2479 Outline the historical events that allowed for the breakdown of democracy in Germany from 1929 to 1939.*
u2480 4a Analyze the Treaty of Versailles as a causal factor for the rise of the National Socialist German Workers’ Party (Nazi Party), and explain how the Nazis appropriated and manipulated antisemitism to their party’s advantage.*
u2481 4b Describe the Weimar Republic and the fragility of its democracy, and explain why Adolf Hitler was able to come to power.*
u2482 5 Explain how the Nazi Party grew into a mass movement that gained and maintained power in Germany through totalitarian means from 1933 to 1945 under the leadership of Adolf Hitler.*
u2483 5a Describe how the Nazis utilized various forms of propaganda, including education and youth programs, to indoctrinate the German population and exploit antisemitic attitudes among the German people to create an atmosphere of terror.*
u2484 5b Evaluate the Nazis’ propaganda efforts regarding the 1936 Berlin Olympics, and describe how the performance of Jesse Owens contradicted the Nazis’ position.
u2485 5c Analyze how the Schutzstaffel (SS) and the Gestapo broke resistance and instilled fear within Germany and in Nazi-occupied territories.*
u2486 5d Explain why many Germans were actively drawn to Nazi ideology.
u2487 6 Explain how Nazis’ racial beliefs were representative of their overall worldview.*
u2488 6a Describe the concept of the “Aryan Race” in Nazi ideology.
u2489 6b Analyze the Nazis’ pursuit of racial purity, including sterilization and other eugenics practices.
u2490 6c Assess how the Nazis’ antisemitism and racial beliefs influenced their foreign policy.*
u2491 NAZI ANTISEMITIC AND RACIAL POLICIES
u2492 (x=41) 7 Describe how Jewish life deteriorated under the Third Reich in Germany and its annexed territories from 1933 to 1938.*
u2493 (x=109) Examples: Austria, the Rhineland, Sudetenland
u2494 7a Explain the motivations behind the boycott of Jewish businesses and Nazi book burnings.
u2495 7b Evaluate the effects of the Nuremberg Laws on Jewish life in Germany.*
u2496 7c Assess the main purposes of the Nazi antisemitic laws and policies and explain how they evolved over time.*
=== page 155 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2499 Holocaust Studies
u2500 7d Assess how German Jews reacted to increasing exclusion and isolation in German society between 1933 and 1939 and describe the strategies they employed both to leave Germany and to enlist help from non-Jews in Germany.
u2501 8 Analyze the causes and effects of the November pogrom (Kristallnacht) and how it transitioned the Nazis’ antisemitic activities from targeted persecution and antisemitic policy to open, public violence against Jews in Germany and Nazi-controlled territories.*
u2502 8a Assess how the destruction of Jewish cultural and religious institutions affected German Jews. Examples: synagogues, yeshivas
u2503 8b Critique American and world responses to the November pogrom (Kristallnacht) and the persecution of Jews in Germany and Nazi-controlled territories.
u2504 9 Describe how Jewish immigration was perceived and restricted by various nations from 1933 to 1939.*
u2505 9a Describe the difficulties European Jewish refugees faced when attempting to emigrate to the United States, Canada, and Latin America during the 1930s and 1940s.*
u2506 Examples: Kindertransport, MS St. Louis, Wagner-Rogers Bill
u2507 9b Evaluate the extent to which Americans were aware of Nazi antisemitic and racial policies and the Holocaust through the information and news available to them during the 1930s and 1940s.
u2508 9c Describe how Alabamians responded to Nazi persecution of the Jews in Europe.* Examples: 1943 Legislative Resolution calling for Jewish State in Palestine, Dora Roth, Grover Hall, Sr., Leon Schwarz, Lister Hill, Rabbi Milton Grafman
u2509 10 Summarize the German T4 (“euthanasia”) Program, including its origins and purposes, and explain how it contributed to the Final Solution.*
u2510 THE WAR IN EUROPE
u2511 11 Summarize the events leading to the outbreak of World War II and how Germany’s actions violated the Treaty of Versailles. *
u2512 11a Analyze Hitler’s motivations for the annexations of Austria and the Sudetenland and the invasion of Poland.
u2513 11b Evaluate the significance of the German invasion of the Soviet Union and how the “Commissar Order” reflected an extension of Nazi racial policies.*
u2514 12 Explain how killing squads, including the Einsatzgruppen, conducted mass shooting operations in Eastern Europe with the assistance of the Schutzstaffel (SS), police units, the army, and local collaborators.*
=== page 156 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2517 Holocaust Studies
u2518 [T1 R1 C1] 12a
u2519 [T1 R1 C2] Locate on a map the Einsatzgruppen killing sites in Eastern Europe.
u2520 13 Explain why the Nazis established ghettos.*
u2521 13a Identify tactics utilized by the Nazis to control, isolate, and weaken Jewish people in the ghettos.
u2522 13b Describe Jewish life in the ghettos, including means of resistance.
u2523 [T2 R1 C1] 13c
u2524 [T2 R1 C2] Locate major ghettos and explain the significance of these sites. Examples: Kovno (history of art), Łódź (industrial), Warsaw (size and revolt)
u2525 [T3 R1 C1] THE FINAL SOLUTION
u2526 [T3 R2 C1] 14 Identify and summarize the key characteristics of the Final Solution, and describe how it was driven by Nazi ideology.*
u2527 [T3 R3 C1] 14a Explain the purpose and scope of the Wannsee Conference in 1942.
u2528 [T3 R4 C1] 15 Differentiate among the types of camps utilized by the Nazis, including their origins, purposes, and the conditions associated with them.*
u2529 [T3 R5 C1] 15a Outline the arrival, selection, and process components of a prisoner’s entry into a camp.*
u2530 [T3 R6 C1] 15b Describe daily life in the camps, including means of resistance.
u2531 [T3 R7 C1] 15c
u2532 [T3 R7 C2] Locate major camps and explain their significance.* Examples: concentration camps - Bergen-Belsen, Buchenwald, Dachau; forced-labor camps - Dora-Mittelbau; transit camps - Drancy, Westerbork; killing centers Auschwitz, Treblinka
u2533 [T3 R8 C1] 16 Critique the role that bystanders, collaborators, and perpetrators played in the implementation of Nazi policies against Jewish people and other targeted groups.*
u2534 [T3 R9 C1] 16a Analyze how corporate complicity aided Nazi goals.*
u2535 [T3 R10 C1] 17 Assess the effectiveness of different armed and unarmed resistance efforts in Europe from 1933 to 1945, including individuals who opposed the Nazis and their policies.* Examples: Dietrich Bonhoeffer, members of the White Rose, Oskar Schindler, Raoul Wallenberg
u2536 [T3 R11 C1] 17a Explain how and why Jewish partisans undertook armed resistance against the Germans and their Axis partners.
u2537 [T3 R12 C1] 18 Critique the responses considered by the Roosevelt administration and the United States military to the suffering of European Jews in the Holocaust.* Examples: Evian and Bermuda Conferences, War Refugee Board
=== page 157 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2540 Holocaust Studies
u2541 [T1 R1 C1] 18a Evaluate American and Allied officials’ knowledge of and response to the Final Solution.
u2542 [T1 R2 C1] 18b Explain the role of the United States military in liberating concentration camps.
u2543 [T1 R3 C1] 18c
u2544 [T1 R3 C2] Identify the locations of concentration camps liberated by American, British, and Red Army soldiers.
u2545 [T1 R4 C1] 19 Explain the purpose of the Death Marches.
u2546 [T1 R5 C1] 19a Evaluate the effect of Nazi policies on other groups targeted by the government of Nazi Germany, including the Roma, Sinti, and people with disabilities.*
u2547 [T1 R6 C1] 19b Outline the chronology of the Allied advance into Germany and the German surrender.
u2548 POST-WAR
u2549 20 Describe the experience of Holocaust survivors and other displaced persons following World War II.*
u2550 20a Research and report on the lives of Holocaust survivors who settled in Alabama after World War II.
u2551 21 Evaluate the extent to which the legal responses, including the Nuremberg Trials, held Nazi officials to account for war crimes and crimes against humanity.*
u2552 21a Assess the contributions of Supreme Court Justice Robert Jackson and the arguments he made as Chief Prosecutor for the United States at the Nuremberg Trials.
u2553 21b Analyze the influence of the Holocaust on the drafting and substance of the 1948 United Nations Declaration of Human Rights.
u2554 21c Explain the effects of the Adolf Eichmann trial in 1961 on policy concerning crimes against humanity, capital punishment, accountability, and the testimony of survivors.
u2555 (x=44) 21d Develop an argument regarding the need for education about the Holocaust and how museums, memorials, and organizations can be used to preserve memory and combat Holocaust denial.*
u2556 (x=109) Examples: Echoes & Reflections, International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance (IHRA), United States Holocaust Memorial Museum (USHMM), Yad Vashem
u2557 22 Differentiate between the concepts of genocide and mass atrocity.*
u2558 (x=45) 22a Analyze the causes and effects of modern-day genocides, and identify the groups involved.
u2559 (x=109) Examples: Bosnia, Cambodia, Darfur, Myanmar, Rwanda, Sudan
u2560 22b Explain how the concepts of personal and civic responsibility have evolved following the Holocaust.*
=== page 158 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2563 Alabama Studies
u2564 Alabama Studies High School Elective
u2565 Grade Level: Grades 9-12
u2566 Course Credit: 1.0 (All standards are required)
u2567 Alabama Studies guides students through a survey of Alabama. The course structure stresses the four major disciplines of the 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies by organizing content into topics emphasizing economics, geography, civics, and themes in Alabama history. The history standards focus on the settlement and establishment of the state, the role of Alabama in conflicts across time, and Alabama’s central role in the Civil Rights Movement. The wide scope of the content covered by the standards offers plentiful opportunities for place-based learning, thus allowing teachers and students to utilize locations in their community and across the state to create meaningful connections with the knowledge they are gaining.
u2568 Course Topics: 1. Geography 2. Origins 3. Conflict 4. Civil Rights 5. Government 6. Economics
u2569 SOCIAL STUDIES PRACTICES
u2570 The two sets of skills outlined below help students grow toward success in social studies disciplines in college, career, and civic life: disciplinary thinking skills and social studies practices. The development of disciplinary thinking is foundational to a successful, engaging experience in social studies education. The disciplines are color-coded to show their alignment with disciplinary connection standards.
u2571 Each practice in the left column of the table below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they engage in disciplinary thinking in social studies?”
u2572 [T1 R1 C2] ● Use geospatial and related technologies to create maps to display and explain the spatial patterns of cultural and environmental characteristics. ● Use maps, satellite images, photographs, and other representations to explain relationships between the locations of places and regions and their political, cultural, and economic dynamics. ● Use geographic data to analyze variations in the spatial patterns of cultural and environmental characteristics at multiple scales.
=== page 159 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2575 Alabama Studies
u2576 [T1 R1 C2] ● Analyze how incentives influence choices that may result in policies with a range of costs and benefits for different groups. ● Use current data to explain the influence of changes in spending, production, and the money supply on various economic conditions. ● Explain how current globalization trends and policies affect economic growth, labor markets, rights of citizens, the environment, and resource and income distribution.
u2577 [T1 R2 C2] ● Analyze change and continuity in historical eras. ● Evaluate how historical events and developments were shaped by unique circumstances of time and place as well as broader historical contexts. ● Analyze the multiple, complex causes and effects of events in the past.
u2578 [T1 R3 C2] ● Evaluate social and political systems in different contexts, times, and places, which promote civic virtues and enact democratic principles. ● Evaluate public policies in terms of intended and unintended outcomes and related consequences. ● Analyze historical, contemporary, and emerging means of changing societies, promoting the common good, and protecting rights.
u2579 The areas of disciplinary thinking and corresponding skills outlined above provide the tools for students to explore course content at a greater depth and establish a deeper understanding. In addition, the following social studies practices develop students’ ability to think critically in responding to inquiries posed in the social studies classroom.
u2580 Each practice listed below is accompanied by specific skills that will be developed in this course. The skills are illustrative of the practice by which they are connected. These skills answer the question, “What do students do when they respond to a compelling question?”
u2581 [T2 R1 C2] ● Gather relevant information from multiple sources, using the origin, authority, structure, context, and corroborative value of the sources to guide the selection. ● Identify evidence that draws information directly and substantively from multiple sources to detect inconsistencies in evidence in order to revise or strengthen claims.
=== page 160 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2584 Alabama Studies
u2585 [T1 R1 C2] ● Construct explanations using sound reasoning, correct sequence (linear or non-linear), examples, and details with significant and pertinent information and data, while acknowledging the strengths and weaknesses of the explanation given its purpose (e.g., cause and effect, chronological, procedural, technical). ● Present adaptations of arguments and explanations on topics of interest to others, using print and oral technologies (e.g., posters, essays, letters, debates, speeches, reports, and maps) and digital technologies (e.g., Internet and digital documentary).
u2586 (x=238) ALABAMA STUDIES CONTENT STANDARDS
u2587 (x=138) Please refer to “Directions for Interpreting Standards” on page 8.
u2588 Each content standard completes the stem “Students will…”
u2589 GEOGRAPHY
u2591 Identify the location of Alabama’s major geographic regions and describe the characteristics that distinguish them from each other.
u2592 1a Summarize how the geography and biodiversity of Alabama formed and evolved during the Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and Cenozoic Periods.
u2593 2 Explain how Alabama’s geography contributes to the biodiversity of the state.
u2594 3 Describe the demographic characteristics of Alabama’s population, and explain how both historic and current migration patterns have shaped these characteristics.
u2595 4 Explain how Alabama’s location creates potential weather threats to the state and identify ways in which Alabamians prepare for and respond to natural disasters.
=== page 161 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2598 Alabama Studies
u2599 ORIGINS
u2601 Describe the cultures, economies, and governments of the first Indigenous peoples to inhabit Alabama.
u2603 Identify the locations of the major Native American tribes of Alabama during the colonial period into the nineteenth century.
u2604 6a Compare and contrast the major Native American tribes in Alabama of the colonial period and nineteenth century.
u2605 7 Outline the chronology of Alabama’s colonial history, identifying the shifting claims by imperial powers and Indigenous peoples engaged in colonial-era conflict.
u2606 8 Explain the impact of “Alabama Fever” on the settlement of Alabama and the growth of agriculture and slavery in the territory.
u2607 9 Outline the chronology of Alabama’s path to statehood in the early nineteenth century, including the shifting of capital locations.
u2608 CONFLICT
u2609 10 Develop an argument regarding the impact of the Creek Wars and Native American removal on the settlement of Alabama.
u2610 11 Outline Alabama’s participation in events leading to the Civil War and in the war itself, and explain how the war created change within the state.
u2611 11a Describe how secession fostered division and led to conflict in the northern half of the state.
u2612 11b Explain the significance of Montgomery as the first capital of the Confederate States of America, and summarize reasons for moving the capital to Richmond.
u2613 11c Assess the impacts of the Civil War on Alabama’s economy and infrastructure, and identify battles and campaigns that affected these.
u2614 11d Compare and contrast how the Civil War affected the lives of different groups of Alabamians, including enslaved people and women.
u2615 12 Explain the role of Alabamians in helping achieve victory in the Spanish American War, World War I, and World War II.
u2616 12a Summarize the legacy of Alabama-based military units, their performance, and their contributions to battle, including the 167th Infantry Regiment and the Tuskegee Airmen.
u2617 12b Describe the mobilization of Alabama industries and people on the home front during World War I and World War II.
=== page 162 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2620 Alabama Studies
u2621 13 Evaluate the ways in which Alabamians and Alabama military installations supported American interests during military conflicts of the Cold War and present day.
u2622 CIVIL RIGHTS
u2623 14 Explain how emancipation and Reconstruction produced both an expansion of rights and freedoms and a backlash against this expansion.
u2624 (x=45) 14a Trace the history of Black institutions in Alabama from their establishment during Reconstruction to the present.
u2625 (x=109) Examples: Black-owned businesses, churches, fraternal organizations, schools
u2626 (x=44) 14b Evaluate the role of new labor systems, Black Codes, and violence in stemming civil rights progress following Reconstruction in Alabama.
u2627 (x=109) Examples: convict-lease labor, sharecropping, tenant farming
u2628 15 Evaluate the extent to which civil rights reformers in Alabama at the turn of the twentieth century successfully challenged the emergence of the Jim Crow South.
u2629 15a Describe the role of women reformers in promoting reform, including Margaret Murray Washington and Julia Tutwiler.
u2630 (x=44) 15b Explain the role of individuals and communities in helping to expand educational and entrepreneurial opportunities for Black Alabamians at the turn of the twentieth century.
u2631 (x=109) Examples: Booker T. Washington, Carrie A. Tuggle, development of HBCUs, Henrietta Gibbs
u2632 16 Explain how major Alabama civil rights campaigns brought about federal action and the resulting expansion of civil and human rights.
u2633 (x=45) 16a Describe how civil rights campaigns in Alabama were led by a coalition of local, grassroots organizations and national civil rights leaders and organizations.
u2634 (x=109) Examples: Community Service Committee, Lowndes County Freedom Party, Montgomery Improvement Association, Neighborhood Organized Workers (NOW), Tuscaloosa Citizens for Action Committee, Tuskegee Civic Association
u2635 (x=44) 16b Identify ways in which opponents of the Civil Rights Movement in Alabama sought to limit its success.
u2636 (x=109) Examples: 16th Street Baptist Church bombing, Bloody Sunday, George Wallace and the “Stand in the Schoolhouse Door,” massive resistance, murders of civil rights activists
u2637 (x=45) 16c Identify civil rights leaders and foot soldiers in Alabama, and explain their contributions to fostering change in the state.
u2638 (x=109) Examples: Amelia Boynton Robinson, Fred Shuttlesworth, Martin Luther King, Jr., Ralph David Abernathy, Rosa Parks, Virginia Foster Durr
u2639 17 Explain the contributions of civil rights tourism to Alabama’s modern-day economy.
=== page 163 === [running header: 2024 Alabama Course of Study: Social Studies]
u2642 Alabama Studies
u2643 GOVERNMENT
u2644 18 Summarize the creation and composition of the Alabama Constitution of 1901 and formulate an argument for constitutional reform in Alabama.
u2645 19 Describe the relationship between Alabama’s state government and local governments, considering the concept of home rule and Dillon’s Rule.
u2646 20 Compare and contrast the roles of statewide elected officials, including the governor, lieutenant governor, secretary of state, and attorney general.
u2647 20a Describe the state court system in Alabama, and explain how the election of judges in Alabama differs from the appointment of judges at the federal level.
u2648 20b Differentiate among the types of state bureaucratic bodies in Alabama, including commissions, boards, and agencies.
u2649 (x=45) 20c Research and report on significant political figures in Alabama history who have shaped the state and nation through their actions and initiatives.
u2650 (x=109) Examples: Condoleezza Rice, Hugo Black, Lurleen Wallace, Richard Shelby, U.W. Clemon, William B. Bankhead
u2651 ECONOMICS
u2652 21 Explain the interrelationship among geography, natural resources, and the development of Alabama’s economy from the early nineteenth century into the early twentieth century.
u2653 21a Describe ways in which Alabama’s geography contributes to the state’s present-day tourism industry.
u2654 (x=45) 21b Evaluate the extent to which agriculture and natural resources remain a significant component of Alabama’s modern economy.
u2655 (x=109) Examples: catfish farming, forestry, peanut production, poultry production
u2656 (x=41) 22 Analyze the influence of federal spending on the growth of Alabama’s economy from the New Deal to the present.
u2657 (x=110) Examples: agricultural research, infrastructure development, military spending
u2658 23 Describe the impact of World War I and World War II on industrialization and urbanization in Alabama.
u2659 24 Develop an argument supporting or denying the premise that globalization has benefited Alabama’s economy since the 1990s, considering industries gained and lost.
u2660 (x=41) 25 Explain the role of Alabama in the global economy based on its major imports and exports.
u2661 (x=110) Examples: aerospace engineering, automobile production, oil imports
