=== page 1 ===
u1 LEADERSHIP | SUPPORT | OVERSIGHT (802) 828-1130 | education.vermont.gov
u2 Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft)
u3 Overview
u4 In grade 2, students will expand on their understanding of the concept of community by exploring past and present neighboring communities in Central America, North America, South America, and the Caribbean. Students will explain continuities and differences among cultures, governments, traditions, and available resources to investigate how individuals work together while acknowledging different perspectives and cultivating empathy. Students will learn how culture spreads across borders and compare and contrast Vermont/local community governments, customs, and traditions to others in the Americas. Students will explain current and historic patterns of human settlement and compare the ways various cultural groups connect and interact across the Americas. Students will describe how resources vary across geography and climates and discuss how resources can be categorized as renewable and non-renewable.
u5 Looking Back and Looking Ahead
u6 Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment
u7 In grade 1, students learned how they are connected to the world around them and developed a deeper understanding of how diverse cultures, values, and beliefs helped to shape the world in which they live.
u8 3rd Grade – Global Interactions
u9 In grade 3, students will expand on their understanding of the concept of community and widen their global lens by exploring Africa, Asia, Europe, and Oceania. Students will explain continuities and differences among cultures, governments, traditions, and resources to investigate how individuals work together while acknowledging different perspectives and cultivating empathy.
u10 Contact: Martha Deiss, Curriculum & Instruction Division, at Martha.Deiss@vermont.gov
=== page 2 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u11 Inquiry
u12 Why inquiry? Using inquiry as an instructional model for the teaching of social studies allows students to authentically ask questions, search for and analyze evidence, and provide explanations and arguments to challenges facing their world.
u13 The inquiry instructional model is driven by authentic questions or problems that have relevance for children. Students learn content, skills, and dispositions as they seek answers to questions and as they apply their learning to take informed action. Pioneered by Dewey (1938), inquiry is an attempt to make classroom experiences feel more like the authentic, curiosity-driven experiences that motivate learning outside of school. (Using Inquiry to Prepare Students for College, Career, and Civic Life, elementary edition, p. 22).
u14 The Inquiry Arc is defined in Dimension 1 (questioning) of the College, Career, and Civic Life (C3) Framework for Social Studies State Standards. In this Framework, Dimension 3 (evidence sourcing), and Dimension 4 (communicating), as well as some evidence indicators found within Dimension 2 – History, have been combined with Dimension 1 into a singular Inquiry Process, as evidenced below. This Inquiry Process begins in the elementary grades and increases in depth and complexity as it spans through high school, preparing students to spiral their learning and skill acquisition in the social studies for college and career readiness.
u15 The Inquiry Process: Students act as social scientists as they ask questions, think critically, solve problems, and share conclusions.
u16 C3 Indicators (K-2):
u17 • Constructing Compelling and Supporting Questions: D1.1, 2, 3 • Gathering and Evaluating Sources: D2. His. 9, 10,12,13, 17; D3. 1 • Communicating and Critiquing Solutions: D2. His.16; D4. 1
u18 Overarching Grade 2 Themes:
u19 • Rules and Laws • Resources • Environmental Connections • Relationships
=== page 3 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u22 Civics
u23 Theme: Rules and Laws
u24 Civic and Political Institutions:
u25 D2.Civ.1.K-2. Describe roles and responsibilities of people in authority.
u26 D2.Civ.3.K-2. Explain the need for and purposes of rules in various settings inside and outside of school.
u27 D2.Civ.6.K-2. Describe how communities work to accomplish common tasks, establish responsibilities, and fulfill roles of
u28 Authority.
=== page 4 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u31 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u32 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u33 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to describe the significance of national traditions and symbols (e.g., flag). Students will be able to identify how government can look different at different times and in different places. Students will identify where rules, laws, and agreements can come from. Students will be able to identify a level of government and describe the role it serves. Students will be able to describe ways that people show support for their country (i.e., patriotism).
u34 [T1 R2 C2] • Symbols of civic and political institutions in: o Flags o National holidays o Songs and pledges • The U.S and Vermont have Constitutions, which are the basis for their laws: o Voting o Compromise o Town meeting o Multiple government levels o Branches of government • How governments serve citizens: o Create order - laws (driving, noise, etc.) o Establish laws that protect people’s rights – free speech, religious freedom, no national language o Citizen’s needs - clean water, safety, schools o Tribal governments o Some countries in the Americas have governments like the U.S. (e.g., elect leaders).
u35 Civic Virtues and Democratic Principles: Applying Civic Virtues and Democratic Principles
u36 D2.Civ.7.K-2. Apply civic virtues when participating in school settings.
u37 D2.Civ.8.K-2. Describe democratic principles such as equality, fairness, and respect for legitimate authority and rules.
u38 D2.Civ.9.K-2. Follow agreed-upon rules for discussions while responding attentively to others when addressing ideas and making decisions as a group.
u39 D2.Civ.10.K-2. Compare their own point of view with others’ perspectives.
=== page 5 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u42 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u43 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u44 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to describe different national identities across the Americas. Students will be able to identify how a nation’s identity may be influenced by the beliefs and values of various cultures. Students will be able to explain how different societies share similarities (e.g., traditions, symbols, etc.).
u45 [T1 R2 C2] • Cultural influences: religion, traditions, values, belief systems, food, customs • Pledge of Allegiance/patriotic songs • Examples of values from different cultures • Examples of beliefs from different cultures • Freedom • Individualism • Patriotism • Equality • Tolerance • Democracy • Family • Opportunity • Ways of participating/being a citizen in one’s school and community in modern times may include voting and participating in the election process, attending public meetings, and writing letters to representatives. • American Indians today may be citizens of their tribal nations, the states they live in, and the United States. • Indigenous people • Tribal nations • Examples of structures, rules, and laws of different societies in North, Central, and South America
=== page 6 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u48 Rules, Processes, and Laws
u49 D2.Civ.11.K-2. Explain how people can work together to make decisions in the classroom.
u50 D2.Civ.12.K-2. Identify and explain how rules function in public (classroom and school) settings.
u51 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u52 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u53 [T1 R2 C1] Students will identify how individuals have brought about change in their community and in North America over time.
u54 [T1 R2 C2] • How communities can be improved over time: Building of parks, playgrounds, libraries • Helping others: Green Up Day, food banks, clothing drives, blood drives, fundraisers
u55 Resources
u56 Canadian First Nations: This PBS Learning Media activity allows students to explore a map of Canada and the distribution of Native American groups across it, fill out a chart about the major groups, and answer questions about the map.
u57 Children in Action (Kid Citizen): In this interactive episode, students draw upon their observations and reflections to explore how children have contributed to recycling efforts in the past and present.
u58 Congress and Milk (Kid Citizen): Students learn how Congress has affected their lives by passing laws to include milk in school lunches, and they match different types of food to a school lunch poster from long ago.
u59 Community Helpers (Kid Citizen): The importance of community helpers is a building block of civics understanding. In this episode, children investigate who community helpers are, and how they have changed over time through exploration of a rich photograph (from the Library of Congress) of a man delivering ice to a schoolhouse in 1899.
u60 Educating for American Democracy: Various grade 2 resources, including “Children’s Lives: Comparing Long Ago to Today” and “Historical Figures and Activists”. Primary Sources Spotlight Kits are primary source collections organized
=== page 7 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u63 around compelling questions to spotlight key history and civics content in K-12 social studies. Each kit includes diverse primary sources, captions, context, and a collection summary.
u64 Famous Latinos and Latinas: From fighting for justice to being groundbreaking thinkers, artists, athletes, and more, Latinas and Latinos have been breaking boundaries in the United States for centuries. Check out the information below to learn more about famous Latinos and Latinas, from actors to activists.
u65 Haudenosaunee Wampum Belts: In this activity, students will learn about the Great Law of Peace that created unity between the Haudenosaunee nations, and how that unity and peace translated over the creation of the Hiawatha Wampum Belt, and peace with the Europeans. Students will then have the opportunity to create their own Wampum belt to represent unity within their family and community.
u66 How Can Being Civic-Minded Help Me Be a Good Citizen? (iCivics): In this inquiry-based unit, students will examine how they can be civic-minded and make decisions for the common good. Then they will examine the lives of Clara Barton and Robert Smalls to explore the ways they demonstrated civic mindedness.
u67 How Can Generosity Help Me Be a Good Citizen? (iCivics): In this inquiry-based unit, students will learn how they can practice generosity to help others. Using historical examples, they will analyze primary sources to discover how children showed generosity to help during the World Wars and investigate how over 100,000 people showed generosity to bring the Statue of Liberty to New York City.
u68 Latin Independence Days: Much like the United States’ independence is celebrated on the 4th of July, Latin American countries honor their own independence movements. Many of these movements occurred in the Age of Revolutions, a period from the late 1700s to the mid-1800s when several countries fought for and gained their independence.
u69 PBS Learning Media – Xavier Riddle: Talking About Life Lessons - Xavier Riddle and his friends explore values and skills such as compassion, perseverance, responsibility, and gratitude in these video clips supported with teacher materials.
=== page 8 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u72 Economics
u73 Theme: Resources
u74 Economic Decision Making
u75 D2.Eco.1.K-2. Explain how scarcity necessitates decision making.
u76 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u77 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u78 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to explain what resources are and how they are used. Students will be able to identify resources as renewable or non- renewable. Students will be able to explain how environments are impacted by production and resource use.
u79 [T1 R2 C2] • Limited resources (natural, human, capital) • Renewable resources are resources that can be created, re-purposed (recycled materials into new materials) or re-grown (forests, crops). • Nonrenewable resources are finite (natural gas, coal, oil). • Different countries have different resources. • How resources are made or used can impact local environments. (e.g., several of South America’s top industries—including beef production, fishing and forestry—have a negative effect on the environment and may not be sustainable)
=== page 9 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u82 Exchange and Markets
u83 D2.Eco.3.K-2. Describe the skills and knowledge required to produce certain goods and services.
u84 D2.Eco.4.K-2. Describe the goods and services that people in the local community produce and those that are produced in other communities.
u85 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u86 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u87 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to explain the difference between producers (e.g., farmers) and consumers (e.g., shoppers).
u88 [T1 R2 C2] • Impacts on production: technology, innovations, trade, culture, labor, knowledge, etc. • Major social, cultural, and economic changes took place in American Indian cultures as a result of the acquisition of goods and technologies from Europeans and others.
u89 The National Economy
u90 D2.Eco.13.K-2. Describe examples of capital goods and human capital.
u91 [T2 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u92 [T2 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u93 [T2 R2 C1] Students will be able to identify economic activities that use resources in the local region (e.g., maple syrup production, skilled and trained labor).
u94 [T2 R2 C2] • Examples of the importance of skill development and learning lead to individual and community growth: o Skills needed by Native Americans in the past compared to skills needed in workplaces today. • American Indian knowledge and related innovations, goods, and technologies (e.g., agriculture) have had enormous global impact.
=== page 10 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u97 The Global Economy
u98 D2.Eco.14.K-2. Describe why people in one country trade goods and services with people in other countries.
u99 D2.Eco.15.K-2. Describe products that are produced abroad and sold domestically and products that are produced domestically and sold abroad.
u100 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u101 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u102 [T1 R2 C1] Students will describe how geography plays a large role in regard to economic production.
u103 [T1 R2 C2] • Examples of productivity in North America and Vermont: o Agriculture o Manufacturing o Tourism o Transportation • Produced in South America: o The warm, wet climate is perfect for two of South America’s most important exports: coffee and cacao, which is the source of cocoa, the base ingredient in chocolate. o Brazil is the world’s largest exporter of coffee and beef. o Ecuador is a major producer of cacao. o Grazing animals such as alpacas, llamas, sheep, and vicuñas thrive in the cold climate regions of South America. These animals are bred for their meat and their wool, which is used in high-quality textiles exported throughout the world. • Major tourist areas in Central America.
u104 Resources
u105 Conserving Non-Renewable Resources: This PBS Learning Media resource lets students learn why it is important to be careful when using non-renewable resources in this video from CYBERCHASE. Students discover that most electricity currently comes from burning gas, oil, and coal, which are all resources that cannot be replaced once they are consumed. Refer to the accompanying discussion questions, renewable energy coloring book from Solar1, and teaching tips for ideas
=== page 11 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u108 on using this video with students and to help them consider ways to use electricity wisely. Discussion questions and vocabulary terms are available in Spanish in the Support Materials. (See also resources in Geography.)
u109 Economic Interdependence: This C3 IDM inquiry is an initial exploration into the concept of interdependence through the lens of community economics and the idea of an economy as a diverse, mutually supportive web of needs and wants, workers and consumers, and problems and solutions. The compelling question “What makes me become we?” challenges students to consider interdependence among individuals and groups and think about how a community is not just a bunch of individual “mes” living in a shared space but also a collective “we” that interacts, grows and contracts, and tries to solve issues. This inquiry builds on students’ first-grade knowledge and challenges them to understand that through businesses, town organizations, and local governments, a community meets the needs and wants of its people, finding strength in collective efforts to address problems.
u110 Global Trade Inquiry: This C3 IDM inquiry leads students through an investigation of economic systems by focusing on the context of trade among world communities. Trading is one of the oldest forms of economic interaction among humans, yet it is also among the most complex. In examining the reasons for international trade and the exports of world communities, students should be able to develop an argument supported by evidence to answer the compelling question, “Why do countries need each other?”
u111 Human Impact on the Environment: This PBS Learning Media collection of resources shows real-world life impact on the environment. Lessons/activities include a focus on ocean litter, air pollution, climate change, and food waste and offer the opportunity for a lens to economics, geography, as well as life and earth sciences.
u112 Geography
u113 Theme: Environmental Connections
u114 Geographic Representations: Views of the World
u115 D2.Geo.2.K-2. Use maps, graphs, photographs, and other representations to describe places and the relationships and interactions that shape them.
u116 D2.Geo.3.K-2. Use maps, globes, and other simple geographic models to identify cultural and environmental characteristics of places.
=== page 12 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u119 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u120 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u121 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to use geographic tools (e.g., maps, lobes, maps, diagrams) to locate places in the Americas. Students will be able to describe unifying characteristics of regions. Students will be able to use major geographic descriptors (equator, continent, province, bodies of water) to differentiate locations in the Americas.
u122 [T1 R2 C2] • Equator, provinces, states, countries, continents • Physical geography vs. political geography (e.g., boundaries and borders) • Time zones • Map vs. Globe • Continent vs. Country • Identify and locate the major continents and oceans in and bordering the Americas using maps and globes: o Locations of North America, Central America, and South America • Identify the U.S land/water borders including: o Canada, Mexico, Atlantic Ocean, Pacific Ocean, and Gulf of Mexico • Regions of the U.S. (i.e., Southeast, Northeast, Great Plains, Southwest, Rocky Mountain, and Pacific Northwest) and their climate, physical features, and population • Identify major physical features of the U.S., including: o Rivers – Colorado, Mississippi, Ohio, Rio Grande, Amazon, Hudson o Mountains – Alaska Range, Appalachian, Rockies o Bodies of Water – Great Lakes, Gulf of Mexico, Atlantic Ocean, Pacific Ocean o Desert – Great Basin o Landforms – Grand Canyon, Great Plains o Man-made – Panama Canal
=== page 13 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u125 Human-Environment Interaction: Place, Regions, and Culture
u126 D2.Geo.4.K-2. Explain how weather, climate, and other environmental characteristics affect people’s lives in a place or region.
u127 D2.Geo.5.K-2. Describe how human activities affect the cultural and environmental characteristics of places or regions.
u128 D2.Geo.6.K-2. Identify some cultural and environmental characteristics of specific places.
u129 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u130 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u131 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to explain that people in the Americas have adapted to and modified their environment in different ways to meet their needs. Students will be able to explain the importance of water to communities and ecosystems in the Americas. Students will be able to explain the role of oceans in shaping climate and supporting life in the Americas.
u132 [T1 R2 C2] • Environmental characteristics of a community: o Climate and weather patterns, landforms, natural resources, and natural hazards • Ocean effect on: o Climate differences, storms, hurricanes, fishing industry, transportation • Importance of water: o Farming/agriculture, drinking and everyday use, ecosystem support, conservation, and anti-pollution efforts • Past cultural adaptations/modifications: o American Southwest – pueblos and irrigation systems o Amazon – stilt-houses and crops that thrive in wet environment o Andes Mountains – terraced living and farming
=== page 14 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u135 Human Population: Spatial Patterns and Movements
u136 D2.Geo.7.K-2. Explain why and how people, goods, and ideas move from place to place.
u137 D2.Geo.8.K-2. Compare how people in different types of communities use local and distant environments to meet their daily needs.
u138 D2.Geo.9.K-2. Describe the connections between the physical environment of a place and the economic activities found there.
u139 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u140 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u141 [T1 R2 C1] Students will explain how the physical environment influences settlement patterns. Students will be able to explain how geography creates a need for global trading.
u142 [T1 R2 C2] • Geographic features, such as bodies of water, topography, climate, land, and natural resources, often affect where people settle and how these people sustain themselves: o Aztecs, Mayans, Incas, Iroquois, Abenaki, Mohawk, Plains (nomadic) • Cultural Spread: o Internet, air travel, social media, television, movies, music, video calling • Imports and Exports • United States exports: o Petroleum, cars, liquified natural gas (world’s largest exporter), consumer goods • Main United States imports: o Consumer goods, industrial supplies, capital goods
=== page 15 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u145 Global Interconnections: Changing Spatial Patterns
u146 D2.Geo.10.K-2. Describe changes in the physical and cultural characteristics of various world regions.
u147 D2.Geo.12.K-2. Identify ways that a catastrophic disaster may affect people living in a place.
u148 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u149 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u150 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to explain what makes up culture. Students will be able to explain how and why cultures change over time. Students will be able to identify how different groups have worked to protect the land and natural resources.
u151 [T1 R2 C2] • Culture can include, but is not limited to: o Characteristics like values, norms, beliefs, and ways of behaving. • Culture can be defined as the main characteristics shared by a group of people at a particular time and in a particular place that are learned and passed down by rules, traditions, and stories. • The belief systems of various indigenous, religious, and racial groups often influence art, music, customs, and cultural traditions in a nation. • Communities from around the world interact with other people and communities and exchange cultural ideas and practices. • Indigenous cultures: o European conquest, disease spread, cultural assimilation, farming practices
u152 Resources
u153 Map Skills/General:
u154 Cardinal Directions and Maps: Students listen to a poem that uses cardinal directions. They use a compass rose to help describe locations of places on a world map.
u155 Central American Studies Curriculum Project: Cultural Identity Preservation Through Storytelling (California Subject Matter Project, Ethnic Studies Initiative): In this mini-unit students will learn about the migrant stories of their families, their school community, and/or local area through the cultural practice of storytelling through oral tradition and
=== page 16 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u158 artwork. Students will create or retell a migrant story through a written narrative, accompanying art piece, and oral presentation.
u159 Classroom Map: Introduce young students to the concept of maps as representations of places with this classroom map.
u160 Cultural Diversity: This C3 IDM is grade-leveled for third graders but can be amended to engage second graders in expanding their understandings of diverse cultures. The compelling question “How does our culture make us similar and different?” is intellectually respectful of students who, by their nature, are interested in people and their similarities and differences. It allows for engagement with several social studies disciplines as students examine diverse cultures and histories around the globe.
u161 Map Skills for Students (National Geographic): This collection features map activities designed to strengthen spatial thinking skills for students. Spatial thinking allows students to comprehend and analyze phenomena related to the places and spaces around them and is one of the most important skills students can develop as they learn geography and various science disciplines.
u162 Mapping the Storybooks: Students use a map and cutouts of a story's characters to follow their actions through space and time. They retell the story in their own words, using the map and positional vocabulary.
u163 Measuring Distances on a Map: Students use a map scale to measure distance between cities and other places on a map of your state. They create and exchange quizzes and use an interactive map to check their answers.
u164 Park Map: Introduce young students to the concept of maps as representations of places with this park map.
u165 PEI Activity 1: Continents and Oceans (ESRI Canada): In this activity, students explore the vast continents and the deep, mysterious oceans using the PEI Atlas. Students start by learning how to navigate the PEI Atlas, learning how to zoom in and out to see the world from different perspectives, from a bird's eye view of the entire world to a closer look at the intricate coastlines of continents. Next, students learn how to label the continents and the world's oceans using the sketch tool. (May be suitable for class-led activity for Grade 2)
u166 PEI Activity 2: Geography Shapes the World (ESRI Canada): In this activity, students explore landform regions around the world and world heritage sites using the PEI Atlas and the activity sheet. Students start by learning how to navigate the PEI Atlas in 3D and how to zoom in and out to see the world from different perspectives. Next, students learn how to use the measure tool to measure distance and coordinates and create an elevation profile. (May be suitable for class-led activity for Grade 2.)
=== page 17 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u169 PEI Activity 3: Exploring Cultural Regions (ESRI Canada): In this activity, students explore data layers to understand if cultural regions have a connection to the physical world using the PEI Atlas and the activity sheet. Students start by learning how to navigate the PEI Atlas data tools. Students learn how to change the look of data and see the table behind the data on a map. Next, students learn how to compare different data layers to look for connections and analyze them. (May be suitable for class-led activity for Grade 2.)
u170 Reading a Resource Map: Students read a natural resource map and use a chart to determine the origins of goods that people use.
u171 Using a Grid with a Zoo Map: Students use a map grid to describe and find locations on a zoo map and a city map. They use a grid to create a message.
u172 Why do People Move? (iCivics): People move for many different reasons, such as for jobs or to be closer to family. In this inquiry-based unit, students will learn all about moving. They will start by learning about the push and pull factors that cause animals to move. While learning new vocabulary, listening to stories, and examining primary source materials, students will better understand reasons why humans move. The unit ends with stories of the push and pull factors that influenced the Great Migration.
u173 Why do We Need Maps? (iCivics): This inquiry-based unit puts kids on the map! Key vocabulary and primary source information allow kids to study different map projections and learn how maps have changed over time. The 1904 World’s Fair Map will be the guide to practice their newly acquired map skills.
u174 North America:
u175 Let’s Discover Canada (ESRI Canada): In this activity, you will discover the Capital cities in Canada, areas of interests, and measure distances between places. The purpose of this quick exercise is to engage with a map of Canada in order to begin the discovery of this large, complex land mass. (May be suitable as a class-led activity.)
u176 North America overview video (National Geographic): Short Destination World video.
u177 U.S. States and Territories (photos from National Geographic): The creators of Molly of Denali worked with Alaska Native elders to ensure its authenticity from the ground up, so watching the series is a solid source of information about Alaska Native traditions for little kids. PBS LearningMedia also has classroom resources to accompany episodes of the show like "Grandpa's Drum."
=== page 18 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u180 Central America:
u181 Beauty and Eco-Relationships in the Natural World of Central America: In this lesson, students learn about three different animals — a bird, a frog, and a butterfly (the Motmot of El Salvador, the Exquisite Spike-Thumb Frog Plectrohyla exquisita of Honduras, and the Owl Butterfly from Guatemala). All these creatures are indigenous to Central America and help us understand the region’s ecosystems. Using visual art, the lesson gives students the opportunity to explore in- depth facts about each animal, while integrating an arts component where students are encouraged to draw the animals and design their own books about the animals to scaffold learning.
u182 Comparing Cultural Holidays: What comparisons can you draw from the artistic and cultural traditions of Halloween and the Day of the Dead?: In this lesson, students will explore the holiday traditions, music, and art of Halloween and Día de los Muertos. Students will create an altar in memory of a loved one.
u183 Elementary Booklist
u184 Elementary Level Poetry
u185 Geography is History: Locate the Countries of Central America: This interactive map lesson provides students with clues based on the history and geography of Central America so that they can find and remember the location of each country.
u186 Maya Skies: Calendars, Seasons, and Time: The Maya of Mesoamerica have been tracking the Sun's movements in the sky for thousands of years. Today, more than seven million Maya people live in regions of Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras, Belize, El Salvador, and other countries. More than two thousand years ago, the Maya created a complex calendar system to organize the events of their world and developed sophisticated mathematics, inventing the zero. They applied their knowledge and observations to time their ceremonies and agricultural cycles. The Maya built extensive cities with monumental architecture, including pyramids that they used to track the stars and predict seasons.
u187 Native American Representation in STEM: Indigenous Innovation: Explores Native scientific legacies. Use this guide to increase awareness of Indigenous knowledge in the subjects of science, technology, engineering, and math. Culturally sensitive activities and resources connected to Native Americans and STEM are provided. In many schools, lessons about Indigenous Peoples are presented only through social studies. This often defines Native Americans by their encounters with others, rather than by their own accomplishments. In truth, Indigenous Peoples in the Americas have
=== page 19 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u190 been innovative and successful managers of their lands and resources for tens of thousands of years. Native innovation is anchored in a deep understanding of how tools and technologies are best suited to the environment
u191 Pancho Rabbit and the Coyote: A Migrant’s Tale: Pancho Rabbit and the Coyote: A Migrant’s Tale by Duncan Tonatiuh is one of the best books we’ve seen for children on the experiences of families forced to migrate to the U.S. to survive. In a child-friendly format, the story addresses the push factors, the hardships caused by family separation, the dangerous journey through Mexico, and crossing the border. The Consortium of Latin American Studies Programs (CLASP), on behalf of the Américas Award, produced an extensive teaching guide to accompany the book written by Katrina Dillon in 2015.
u192 Smithsonian in the Classroom: Native American Dolls: Smithsonian Institute. “Developed in collaboration with the Smithsonian Center for Education and Museum Studies, this lesson plan presents the firsthand perspectives of five Native American doll makers from around the United States. Students examine full–color images of dolls from the museum's collection in order to learn more about the diverse cultures, communities, and environments the dolls represent”.
u193 South America:
u194 South America overview video (National Geographic) Short Destination World video.
u195 The Great Inka Road: How Can a Road System Be an Example of Innovation?: The Inka Empire thrived in South America in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. To support the empire, the Inka built a vast road system for transportation, communication, and integration. This lesson highlights Inka engineering accomplishments that allowed the Inka to manage their vast and disperse empire, and how their legacy has relevancy in the present day. Explore a variety of sources to learn about the engineering of the Great Inka Road system and the Q'eswachaka suspension grass bridge. **El Grand Camino** what is happening currently along the route?
u196 History
u197 *Note: C3 indicators for Historical Sources and Evidence are woven into the Inquiry Process.
u198 Theme: Relationships
u199 Change, Continuity, and Context
=== page 20 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u202 D2.His.1.K-2. Create a chronological sequence of multiple events.
u203 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u204 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u205 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to develop a chronological sequence of events in the Americas.
u206 [T1 R2 C2] • Describe periods of time in terms of: o Decades o Centuries • Timelines can reflect key historical events. • Past: o First Americans o European arrival o Colonial founding: Jamestown, Plimoth/Patuxet, Williamsburg o Mayan and Aztec Calendars • Present: Examine change/differences within the Americas of things that students are currently familiar with: o Transportation o Communication o Food o Homes/shelter o Clothing o Resources • Persons of influence in the past: o Pocahontas, Tecumseh, Sacagawea, Columbus, Cortes, Champlain, Hudson, Ahuitzotl, Montezuma II, Mog, Grey Lock, Ethan and Ira Allen • Contemporary leaders: o Activists, presidents, scientists; student’s choice if they can define person(s)/groups as leaders
=== page 21 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u209 Perspectives
u210 D2.His.4.K-2. Compare perspectives of people in the past to those of people in the present.
u211 D2.His.6.K-2. Compare different accounts of the same historical event.
u212 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u213 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u214 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to explain how perspectives and accounts of different historical events can vary. Students will be able to describe how a community may consist of multiple cultures. Students will be able to identify, respect, and explain the diverse cultures of their community and communities in the United States.
u215 [T1 R2 C2] • It is okay to have different perspectives as long as harm is not caused. • Evidence can be used to validate perspectives. • Discuss how different experiences shape perspective; share evidence of experience from multiple viewpoints (Native Americans, colonists). • Discuss how different languages, cultures, traditions can affect ways in which people see the world, both now and in the past.
=== page 22 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u218 Causation and Argumentation
u219 D2.His.14.K-2. Generate possible reasons for an event or development in the past.
u220 D2.His.16.K-2. Select which reasons might be more likely than others to explain a historical event or development.
u221 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u222 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u223 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to use different types of sources to support an argument. Students will be able to use historical evidence/sources to create an explanation about an event(s) in the past.
u224 [T1 R2 C2] Use of: • Primary and secondary sources • Photographs • Maps • Journal entries
u225 Resources
u226 Anishinaabe/Ojibwe/Chippewa: Culture of an Indian Nation: This lesson provides information and activities about one American Indian Nation, the Anishinaabe, called Ojibwe in Canada and parts of the U.S., and Chippewa other regions of the U.S., and engages students in research on its history, location, and past and present culture. By focusing on one Native American tribe, students will acquire a differentiated and accurate understanding of one of the many diverse peoples and cultures living throughout the lands that are now referred to as North and South America, in addition to recognizing elements of a common history of conquest and displacement by Europeans that affected all Native American peoples
u227 Canada - Core Knowledge: This unit introduces the geography and people of Canada. Students learn about Canada’s government, major population centers (including Montreal, Quebec City, and Toronto), and the country’s vast wilderness and natural resources. They are introduced to Canada’s indigenous peoples and to its French and British heritage, which
=== page 23 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u230 lie behind the country’s two official languages. Students explore the strong influence of French culture in Quebec. They also consider similarities and differences between Canada and the United States and learn how Canada’s history and relationship with Britain (the United Kingdom) are different from those the U.S. has with that nation.
u231 C3 IDM - Holidays: This inquiry encourages learners expand their study of self and others by deepening their understanding of the role of traditions, holidays, and symbols in establishing cultural identity and unity. The compelling question “What makes holidays special?” reflects an enduring conversation about how and why people engage in ritual and tradition. It is respectful of students’ intellectual efforts as they are likely to be interested in knowing more about traditions and holidays and are likely to have a meaningful entry point into the discussion based upon personal experiences.
u232 C3 IDM - Identity: This inquiry leads students through an investigation of self by recognizing that all humans have both unique and similar characteristics. By investigating the compelling question “Is everyone unique?” students begin to see how they are similar to and different from their classmates. The study of similarities and differences among individuals provides the foundation for students to demonstrate their understanding of and respect for others.
u233 Colonial Williamsburg: Varied resources from Historic Trades and Skills to Created Equal, which help students get a look at the colonial Virginia settlement; other resources include the Art Museum for CW Kids.
u234 The Earliest Americans - Core Knowledge: This unit introduces students to some of the different native peoples who populated America many years before the arrival of European explorers. Students learn how some of the earliest Americans arrived in North America as early as thirty thousand years ago along the Pacific Coast, whereas others traveled from Asia across Beringia, the land bridge. Over time, native peoples migrated throughout the North American continent and into Central and South America. Students explore how these early peoples adapted to their environments and developed unique cultures. Chapters focus on the Inuit, the Ancestral Pueblo and Mound Builders, and specific Native American peoples of the American Southwest, Southeast, and Eastern Woodlands.
u235 Educating for American Democracy: Various grade 2 resources, including “Children’s Lives: Comparing Long Ago to Today” and “Historical Figures and Activists”. Primary Sources Spotlight Kits are primary source collections organized around compelling questions to spotlight key history and civics content in K-12 social studies. Each kit includes diverse primary sources, captions, context, and a collection summary.
=== page 24 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u238 Ethan Allen Homestead Museum: Curated collections with themes including Abenaki Heritage, Women in early Vermont, Homesteading and Artisan Crafts, and Slavery in early Vermont.
u239 Exploration of North America - Core Knowledge: This unit focuses on English, French, and Spanish explorers who crisscrossed the Americas in search of new finds, whether gold, riches, or a passage through the continent from east to west. After reviewing the explorations of Columbus, students learn about Ponce de León’s search for the Fountain of Youth, De Soto’s long march to the Mississippi, Coronado’s quest for cities of gold, the founding of St. Augustine, and the development of settlements around Spanish missions. The focus then shifts to the explorers who undertook perilous voyages to find the Northwest Passage, a shortcut across North America to Asia, including John Cabot, Samuel de Champlain, and Henry Hudson. Throughout the unit students reinforce their map skills and geographic knowledge and also learn about the interactions of the explorers with Native Americans, including Popé and the Pueblo Revolt.
u240 History’s Mysteries - How do We Celebrate Our Shared Traditions?: In this unit, students will solve four historical mysteries using evidence from primary sources including 1) “Where is the history in a name?”, 2) What shared traditions make your family special?”, 3) Why do we have a day off from school?”, and 4) “How does a tradition become a holiday?” Students will explore naming traditions, family traditions, civic versus religious holidays, and lastly, the story of Juneteenth and how it has become a holiday celebrated across America.
u241 History’s Mysteries - What is the Difference Between Then and Now?: In this unit, students will explore three mysteries, 1) “What is the difference between then and now?”, 2) “Where do people work?”, and 3) “How is work different now than in the past?” Students will explore primary source images from the Library of Congress to solve historical mysteries with evidence.
u242 KidCitizen - Community Helpers: In this interactive lesson, students will learn how community helpers have changed and stayed the same over time by exploring a photograph of a man delivering ice to a schoolhouse around 1900 and investigate who community helpers are.
u243 Learning for Justice - What is a Family?: This lesson provides a framework that will help students talk about their own and others’ families in safe, caring ways.
u244 Native American Cultures Across the U.S.: Children's literature, movies, and other media often perpetuate generalized stereotypes, whether positive or negative, in their representations of Native American peoples. Teaching children about the First Americans in an accurate historical context while emphasizing their continuing presence and influence within the
=== page 25 === [running header: Grade 2 – The Americas (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025)]
u247 United States is important for developing a national and individual respect for the diverse American Indian peoples and is necessary to understanding the history of this country.
u248 Native American Dwellings: Statistics in Schools: In this activity, students will look at historical images to learn about three types of Native American dwellings — teepees, pueblo adobe structures, and hogans. Students will make observations about the types of dwellings in the images. Then students will discuss their observations as a class.
u249 PBS Learning Media Habitats and Discoveries: Images of the Past: In this lesson, your students will participate in a hands-on observation challenge that will encourage them to look closer at the habitats around them.
u250 PBS Learning Media - The Fred T. Korematsu Institute - How are We Defined as Americans?: In this lesson, the students will explore what it means to them to be an American. They will reflect on their own identities and family histories to better understand their experience. Individually and as a group, students will develop a definition of what it means to be an American and add to that definition throughout the year.
u251 Plimoth Patuxet Museum: Teacher tools and resources to help students understand multiple perspectives and challenge stereotypes of past history. Teachers will need to cull from the site to find primary and secondary sources that are grade appropriate.
u252 Project 562: Explore and discuss the photos from Project 562, which includes images of contemporary Native life from over 562 federally recognized tribes.
u253 Redesign Your Thanksgiving Curriculum: This collection of resources from the National Education Association ranges from articles to lesson plans, advice, and books.
u254 Teaching Native American History and Culture: This infographic from NAPTAC covers some key information to inform teaching Native American history and culture as well as creating a more inclusive environment for Native students.
u255 Teotihuacan: City of Water, City of Fire: This virtual exhibit invites students to explore recent archaeological finds made at the site, while placing them in historical and cultural context.
u256 Toolkit for Decolonizing Thanksgiving: This toolkit now has two parts and assembles resources, including books, that will help reframe the story of Thanksgiving.
u257 Vermont Classroom Blueprint: Vermont Office of the Secretary of State. A K-12 ‘blueprint’ providing resources and lesson plans for active civic engagement in your classroom.
