=== page 1 ===
u1 LEADERSHIP | SUPPORT | OVERSIGHT (802) 828-1130 | education.vermont.gov
u2 Grade 7 – Vermont and the U.S. – From Reconstruction to the Civil Rights
u3 Movement (Draft)
u4 Overview
u5 In grade 7, students will build on their knowledge of Vermont and U.S. politics, geography, economics, and peoples as they re-visit the sectional conflicts over slavery that continued into Reconstruction and beyond and led to the long struggle in the 19th and 20th centuries for civil rights. Grade 7 content spans decades; takes students through Reconstruction, industrialization, and world wars, and allows students to dig into critical topics and America’s role in them, such as human rights, the Holocaust, genocide, women’s suffrage, and atomic weaponry. By the end of grade 7, students will have a broad understanding of the roles that politics and power have played both locally and on a world stage; be aware of their changing cultural and physical environments; and gain keen insight as to the ways in which individuals, businesses, governments, and societies make decisions. This broad journey provides a framework for understanding and will allow for deeper analysis of history in high school.
u6 Looking Back
u7 In grade 6, students examined how movement and migration impacted the interactions between expanding civilizations through conquest and trade, including the physical and political geography and ancient societies of Latin America, South and East Asia, Oceania, and Europe.
u8 Looking Ahead
u9 In grade 8, students will utilize past knowledge and understanding to expand their focus on the core concepts and principles underlying America’s democracy. Students will collaborate to identify a problem(s) and develop solutions that would require government involvement and participate in student-led civics projects. Students will also learn about the workings of both national and global economies and develop an understanding of the decision-making processes of individuals, businesses, and governments and how they are connected.
u10 Contact: Martha Deiss, Curriculum & Instruction Division, at Martha.Deiss@vermont.gov
=== page 2 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u11 Inquiry
u12 Why inquiry? Using inquiry as an instructional model for the teaching of social studies allows students to authentically ask questions, search for and analyze evidence, and provide explanations and arguments to challenges facing their world.
u13 The inquiry instructional model is driven by authentic questions or problems that have relevance for children. Students learn content, skills, and dispositions as they seek answers to questions and as they apply their learning to take informed action. Pioneered by Dewey (1938), inquiry is an attempt to make classroom experiences feel more like the authentic, curiosity-driven experiences that motivate learning outside of school. (Using Inquiry to Prepare Students for College, Career, and Civic Life, elementary edition, p. 22)
u14 The Inquiry Arc is defined in Dimension 1 (questioning) of the College, Career, and Civic Life (C3) Framework for Social Studies State Standards. In this Framework, Dimension 3 (evidence sourcing), and Dimension 4 (communicating), as well as some evidence indicators found within Dimension 2 – History, have been combined with Dimension 1 into a singular Inquiry Process, as evidenced below. This Inquiry Process begins in the elementary grades and increases in depth and complexity as it spans through high school, preparing students to spiral their learning and skill acquisition in the social studies for college and career readiness.
u15 Inquiry Process (K-12): Students act as social scientists as they ask questions, think critically, solve problems, and share conclusions.
u16 C3 Indicators (6-8):
u17 Constructing Compelling and Supporting Questions: D1.1, 2, 3; His. 12
u18 Gathering and Evaluating Sources: D2. His. 6, 10, 12, 13; D3. 1, 2, 3
u19 Communicating and Critiquing Conclusions: D2. His. 16; D4. 1, 2, 4
u20 Overarching Themes:
u21 • Civics – Grades 6 and 8, and woven into History • Disparities and Opportunities • Regional Differences and Migration Patterns • Conflict and Conciliation
=== page 3 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u24 Civics
u25 Theme: Power and Rights
u26 Note: Civics C3 Indicators are not in the grade 7 scope and sequence and can be addressed/assessed in grades 6 and 8 and are also woven into the History Indicators.
u27 Economics
u28 Theme: Disparities and Opportunities
u29 Note: The Global Economy C3 Indicators are not in the grade 7 scope and sequence and can be addressed/assessed in grades 6 and 8.
u30 Economic Decision Making
u31 D2.Eco.1.6-8. Explain how economic decisions affect the well-being of individuals, businesses, and society.
u32 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u33 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u34 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to explain how technology and the growth of industry transformed American society. Students will be able to identify the rise of labor and economic movements.
u35 [T1 R2 C2] Reconstruction - Progressive Era: Business leaders (Vanderbilt, Mellon, Carnegie, Rockefeller, J.P. Morgan); limited competition and maximization of profits; Gilded Age; industrialization; technological breakthroughs – steam engines, railroads, Bessemer steel, electrical power, telephonic communication Great Depression and New Deal: New Deal programs; mass unemployment; growth of unions WWII to Modern Civil Rights Era: Taft-Hartley Act; increased strikes; economic justice, United Farm Worker’s Bureau
=== page 4 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u38 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u39 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u40 [T1 R2 C1] Continue Students will be able to identify how economic growth and decline have positively and negatively impacted Vermonters and the nation.
u41 [T1 R2 C2] Economic Movements: Labor unions; women in the workforce (pink collar); safety in the workplace (laws, child labor laws); Knights of Labor; American Federation of Labor; Congress of International Organizations strikes (Great Railroad Strike of 1877, Haymarket Riot); Cesar Chavez (farm workers’ rights); A. Philip Randolph (Black worker rights) History and the Economy: Buying on margin, speculation, Great Depression, Gold Rushes, Dust Bowl, war manufacturing, post World War II economic boom, industrial boom(s) and decline(s), economic panics of 1800s, stock market crashes
u42 Exchange and Markets
u43 D2.Eco.3.6-8. Explain the roles of buyers and sellers in product, labor, and financial markets.
u44 D2.Eco.6.6-8. Explain how changes in supply and demand cause changes in prices and quantities of goods and services, labor, credit, and foreign currencies.
u45 D2.Eco.8.6-8. Explain how external benefits and costs influence market outcomes.
u46 D2.Eco.9.6-8. Describe the roles of institutions such as corporations, non-profits, and labor unions in a market economy
=== page 5 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u49 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u50 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u51 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to explain how industry and trade impact the economy and people of Vermont and the nation. Students will be able to explain how economic systems and policies affected different racial and social groups from Reconstruction to the Modern Civil Rights era.
u52 [T1 R2 C2] Individuals and Groups Affected: Indentured servants, enslaved people, Free Blacks, sharecroppers/tenant farmers, women homesteaders, women in the workforce (Rosie the Riveter), entrepreneurs, farmers, mill workers, miners, loggers. Policies/Systems: Black Wall Street, Great Migration, American Indian fur trade, New Deal Programs, farming/agriculture, tourism. Sharecropping and Tenant Farming (Post-Civil War – early 1900s) Economic System: Southern agricultural system where formerly enslaved people and poor white farmers worked land in exchange for a share of the crops. • Effect: African Americans remained in poverty and debt due to unfair contracts; Landowners had more power; limited opportunity for Black economic advancement. Segregated Labor and Low-Wage Jobs (Jim Crow Era) Economic Policy/Practice: Racial segregation in employment; "last hired, first fired." • Effect: African Americans and other minorities often denied skilled jobs, union membership, or fair wages; women, especially women of color, were restricted to low- paying domestic or service jobs. New Deal Programs (1930s) Economic Policy: Government relief programs during the Great Depression (e.g., Social Security, housing assistance, job creation programs). • Effect: Helped many, but excluded farm workers and domestic workers, which affected Black and Latinx workers. Housing programs supported segregation through practices like redlining, denying loans to Black families.
=== page 6 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u55 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u56 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u57 [T1 R2 C1] Continue
u58 [T1 R2 C2] GI Bill After WWII (1944 onward) Economic Policy: Gave returning veterans benefits like college tuition, home loans, and job training. • Effect: White veterans accessed college and bought homes, helping to build middle- class wealth. Black veterans were often denied benefits due to local racism, leaving them economically disadvantaged. Civil Rights Era Economic Focus (1960s) Economic Ideas: “Freedom from poverty” and economic justice became central to the Civil Rights Movement. Examples: Poor People’s Campaign (organized by MLK Jr.) demanded fair wages, jobs, and housing. Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of 1965 aimed to end discrimination, which had long limited economic mobility for Black Americans.
=== page 7 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u61 The National Economy
u62 D2.Eco.12.6-8. Explain how inflation, deflation, and unemployment affect different groups.
u63 D2.Eco.13.6-8. Explain why standards of living increase as productivity improves.
u64 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u65 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u66 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to explain the changing role of government in people’s lives over time. Students will be able identify ways the federal government has influenced the economy.
u67 [T1 R2 C2] Reconstruction – Gold standard; not much government control over economy or major efforts for tax/spend – Panic of 1873, Panic of 1893; Freedman’s Bureau; land redistribution Progressive Era – Federal Reserve creation, decisions led to 1929 Great Depression; anti- trust laws, Interstate Commerce Commission; Child Labor laws Great Depression – FDR’s New Deal – government spending; jobs programs – WPA, CCC; Social Security; Taxes raised on wealthy; Wagner Act of 1935; Fair Labor Standards Act WWII/post WWII – War production; GI Bill 1960s-1970s – Kennedy tax cuts; Johnson’s Great Society/War on Poverty – fought poverty/boost economy; Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)
=== page 8 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u70 Resources
u71 Fair Labor Practices, Current and Historical- New Jersey: Then and Now - PBS Learning Media: Working conditions in the Paterson silk industry and the farms of the Pinelands varied for the immigrant and seasonal laborers. Labor movements and leaders like Elizabeth Gurley Flynn in Paterson and Elizabeth White at Whitesbog worked to improve the conditions of workers including fair hours, conditions, and benefits. This lesson will examine the labor conditions of historical industries in New Jersey while comparing these with modern fair labor practices and issues both in the country and around the world.
u72 Gilded Age and Progressive Era - Bill of Rights Institute: In these three units - with 8 lessons and 2 videos - students will respond to the following inquiry: “How did Americans at the turn of the 20th century address the rapid technological, demographic, and economic changes around them?” Provide students an in-depth look at this formative period in United States history. Through primary-source-based activities and engaging narratives, students will be exposed to this fascinating period and analyze its numerous parallels to today.
u73 Industrial Revolution: Uncovering America - PBS Learning Media: How did the Industrial Revolution change the United States? What makes industrialization possible? How does art reflect the varying experiences within a capitalist economy? In suggested activities, students consider multiple viewpoints of images from the Industrial Revolution; research and evaluate arguments for and against capitalism; and investigate their own community to create a portrait of their local industry.
u74 The Industrial Age in America: Robber Barons and Captains of Industry - National Endowment for the Humanities: In this lesson students will be able to evaluate the actions taken by various captains of industry and robber barons of the time.
u75 The Industrial Age in America: Sweat Shops. Steel Mills, and Factories - National Endowment for the Humanities: In this lesson, students will analyze the working conditions that led to the Haymarket Affair, the Homestead Strike, and the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory Fire and the actions taken by the managers and workers involved in the incidents, and evaluate the significance of the featured events to the labor movement, the industrialists involved, and the attitude of the American people toward working conditions in the United States.
=== page 9 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u78 Geography
u79 Theme: Regional Differences and Migration Patterns
u80 Geographic Representations: Views of the World
u81 D2.Geo.1.6-8. Construct maps to represent and explain the spatial patterns of cultural and environmental characteristics.
u82 D2.Geo.2.6-8. Use maps, satellite images, photographs, and other representations to explain relationships between the locations of places and regions, and changes in their environmental characteristics.
u83 D2.Geo.3.6-8. Use paper based and electronic mapping and graphing techniques to represent and analyze spatial patterns of different environmental and cultural characteristics.
u84 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u85 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u86 [T1 R2 C1] Students will analyze and interpret maps to explain how cultural, political, and societal factors influence the spatial distribution of populations, and evaluate how mapping practices impact representation, resource allocation, and social equity.
u87 [T1 R2 C2] • Political maps • Census maps • Apportionment • Gerrymandering • Redlining • Homestead Act Black Codes/Jim Crow • Plessy v. Ferguson • Voting Laws • Great Migration • Louisiana Purchase
=== page 10 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u90 Human-Environment Interaction: Place, Regions, and Culture
u91 D2.Geo.4.6-8. Explain how cultural patterns and economic decisions influence environments and the daily lives of people in both nearby and distant places.
u92 D2.Geo.6.6-8. Explain how the physical and human characteristics of places and regions are connected to human identities and cultures.
u93 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u94 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u95 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to explain how geography influenced the culture of the country.
u96 [T1 R2 C2] • Enslaved labor was used to transform the Southern landscape for cotton, sugar, and tobacco farming. • Environmental destruction and land exhaustion in the South led to westward expansion. • The South was more rural and dependent on agriculture; the North was more urban and industrial. These differences influenced how Reconstruction played out in each region. • Places in the North and South both had industrializing economies, but at different scales and with different labor systems. • In the South, slavery shaped a distinct human and cultural landscape before the Civil War. • After the war, freed Black communities began building churches, schools, and political organizations—changing the human geography. • Urbanization and migration (especially the Great Migration) moved Black communities into Northern cities, shifting demographics and political power; segregation, Harlem Renaissance.
=== page 11 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u99 Human Population: Spatial Patterns and Movements
u100 D2.Geo.7.6-8. Explain how changes in transportation and communication technology influence the spatial connections among human settlements and affect the diffusion of ideas and cultural practices.
u101 D2.Geo.8.6-8. Analyze how relationships between humans and environments extend or contract spatial patterns of settlement and movement.
u102 D2.Geo.9.6-8. Evaluate the influences of long-term human-induced environmental change on spatial patterns of conflict and cooperation.
u103 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u104 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u105 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to explain the impact - both intended and unintended - of geographic expansion. Students will be able to explain the impact of westward expansion on Native American communities. Students will be able to explain how immigration and urbanization influenced the country during the post- Reconstruction era.
u106 [T1 R2 C2] Geographic Expansion – Louisiana Purchase, Westward Expansion, Annexation of Alaska and Hawaii, Gadsden Purchase, Kansas-Nebraska Act, Annexation of Texas, US Territories, Possession of Philippines Impacts of Expansion – roads, city growth, businesses and industry, railroads, land grants, pollution, ecosystems, loss of native lands, access to natural resources Policies/Acts • Homestead Act (1862) and its long-term effects, Indian Removal policies and the continuation of forced relocations • The Dawes Act (1887) – broke up tribal lands, encouraged assimilation • Reservation system and loss of traditional homelands • Battle of Little Bighorn (1876) and Wounded Knee Massacre (1890) • Boarding schools and the effort to "Americanize" Native children Examples of U.S. Immigration after Reconstruction: Massive immigration after 1870 and how new social patterns, conflicts, and ideas of national unity developed amid growing cultural diversity
=== page 12 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u109 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u110 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u111 [T1 R2 C1] Continue
u112 [T1 R2 C2] Southern and Eastern European Immigration (1880s–1920s) • Who: Italians, Poles, Russians, Greeks, Jews, and others • Why: Escaping poverty, persecution (especially Jews from Russia), and seeking economic opportunity • Impact: Settled in cities (e.g., New York, Chicago, Boston); filled industrial jobs (factories, steel mills, garment industry); faced discrimination and sparked nativist backlash; helped build American infrastructure and culture Chinese Immigration • Who: Chinese immigrants, mostly men • Why: Seeking work during the Gold Rush and to build the Transcontinental Railroad • Impact: Post-Reconstruction Issues: After Reconstruction, many stayed and worked in the West; Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882: first major federal law restricting immigration by nationality Irish Immigration (Continued from pre-Civil War era) • Who: Irish Catholics • Why: Escaping poverty and political unrest • Impact: Became politically active in urban centers; took part in labor movements and political machines like Tammany Hall German Immigration • Who: German immigrants, both skilled workers and farmers • Why: Escaping war, seeking religious freedom or land; in Midwest (Ohio, Wisconsin, etc.) • Impact: Influenced American beer brewing, education, and farming techniques
=== page 13 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u115 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u116 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u117 [T1 R2 C1] Continue
u118 [T1 R2 C2] Scandinavian Immigration • Who: Norwegians, Swedes, Danes • Why: Land and opportunity; settled in Midwest and Great Plains • Impact: Helped develop farming communities and contributed to American agrarian culture Middle Eastern and North African Immigration (late 1800s–early 1900s) • Who: Primarily Lebanese and Syrian Christians • Why: Religious freedom and escaping Ottoman rule • Impact: Became merchants, shopkeepers, and community leaders
=== page 14 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u121 Global Interconnections: Changing Spatial Patterns
u122 D2.Geo.12.6-8. Explain how global changes in population distribution patterns affect changes in land use in particular places.
u123 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u124 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u125 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to analyze migration patterns to understand the relationships among major events, government policies, and private action in the US from Reconstruction to the modern civil rights era. Students will be able to explain the diffusion of ideas, technologies, and cultural practices in the US from Reconstruction to the modern civil rights era.
u126 [T1 R2 C2] Migration Influences: Black Codes/Jim Crow; Supreme Court Cases - Plessy v. Ferguson; Voting Laws; Westward expansion; Homestead Act; Transcontinental railroad; Manifest destiny; Great migration; Redlining; Dust Bowl migration; Second Great Migration; White Flight Diffusion of Ideas: Abolition, Suffrage, Women’s rights, civil rights Spread of Technology: Railroads, radio and television, cars and highways Spread of Cultural Practices: Harlem Renaissance, food and music, traditions (immigrant/indigenous)
=== page 15 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u129 Resources
u130 A Cheyenne Odyssey - Mission US: A Public Media Project: Mission US is an award- winning media project that immerses young people in transformational moments in US history; teacher guide. In “A Cheyenne Odyssey,” players become Little Fox, a Northern Cheyenne boy whose life is changed by the encroachment of white settlers, railroads, and U.S. military expeditions. As buffalo diminish and the U.S. expands westward, players experience the Cheyenne’s persistence through conflict and national transformation.
u131 A Cold Reception: Anti-Immigrant Sentiment in the United States - PBS Learning Media: This media-enhanced lesson plan will use video from Dr. Henry Louis Gates Jr.'s PBS series Faces of America to explore the hostile reception immigrants have often received from anti-immigrant "nativists" in an America not always eager to accept them and the change they represent.
u132 A People on the Move- Great Migrations - PBS Learning media: In this lesson, students will contextualize the Great Migration (1910–1940) to better understand its importance and impact on Black Americans and the country. Students will discuss the concepts of resistance and cultural flourishing in the context of the Great Migration. Additionally, students will participate in historical research and presentation, as well as creative expression, to dive deeper into the challenges and triumphs of this historical moment.
u133 City of Immigrants - Mission US: A Public Media Project: Mission US is an award- winning media project that immerses young people in transformational moments in US history; teacher guide. In “City of Immigrants,” players navigate New York’s Lower East Side as Lena, a young Jewish immigrant from Russia. Trying to save money to bring her parents to America, she works long hours in a factory for little money and gets caught up in the growing labor movement.
u134 Hunter-Dunbar Expedition - C3 IDM: This inquiry leads students through an investigation of the Hunter-Dunbar expedition, commissioned by President Thomas Jefferson after the purchase of the Louisiana Territory from France. By investigating the compelling question “Is the Hunter-Dunbar Expedition Worth Remembering?” students evaluate the contributions Dr. George Hunter and William Dunbar made in the discovery and cataloguing of natural resources, geographic features, and Native American groups in the lower portion of the Louisiana Territory (present-day Arkansas). The formative performance tasks build on knowledge and skills through the course of the inquiry and help students draw evidence from articles, charts, graphs, and maps while justifying their reasoning in writing.
=== page 16 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u137 Immigration and Displacement: Uncovering America - PBS Learning Media: In this set of artworks and suggested activities, students will explore the motivations of immigration and causes of displacement throughout American history, practice telling stories, investigate transformational journeys, and reflect on the American dream.
u138 Population Profile of Our New Nation: A Comparison of the 1790 and 1800 Censuses - Statistics in Schools: In this activity, students will refer to the 1790 and 1800 censuses to compare the total population with the population of enslaved people, drawing conclusions from the data.
u139 Promised Land - C3 IDM: This inquiry leads students through an investigation of immigration experiences in the United States. By investigating the compelling question “Is America the ‘Promised Land’ for the world’s immigrants?” students evaluate the motivating factors and deterrents for immigration to the United States both in the past and present. The formative performance tasks help students build on knowledge and skills through the course of the inquiry and allow students to recognize the push/pull factors for immigrants throughout our history.
u140 They’re Coming to America: Immigrants Past and Present - PBS Learning Media: In this lesson, students explore the history of this nation of immigrants. In the introductory activity, students identify their own countries of heritage, as well as those of their classmates. Students then identify ethnic groups that migrated to the United States during various historic waves of immigration. In the learning activities, students watch video segments from Faces of America to develop an understanding of key motivations for immigration and explore online resources to examine specific immigrant experiences from various points in American history. In the culminating activity, students utilize their historical knowledge and examination of case studies to develop a brief narrative summarizing the experiences, aspirations, and emotions of a hypothetical immigrant to then the past or the present.
u141 Up from the Dust - Mission US: A Public Media Project: Mission U.S. is an award- winning media project that immerses young people in transformational moments in U.S. history; teacher guide. In “Up from the Dust,” players take on the roles of twins Frank and Ginny Dunn, whose family wheat farm is devastated by the Great Depression and Dust Bowl. As they experience the hardships of the 1930s, players learn about Americans’ strategies for survival – as individuals, communities, and a nation.
=== page 17 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u144 History
u145 *Note: C3 indicators for Historical Sources and Evidence are woven into the Inquiry Process.
u146 Theme: Growth and Struggles
u147 Change, Continuity, and Context
u148 D2.His.1.6-8. Analyze connections among events and developments in broader historical contexts.
u149 D2.His.2.6-8. Classify series of historical events and developments as examples of change and/or continuity.
u150 D2.His.3.6-8. Use questions generated about individuals and groups to analyze why they, and the developments they shaped, are seen as historically significant.
u151 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u152 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u153 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to describe how Reconstruction programs transformed social relations in the South. Students will be able to explain how citizenship in a democratic society affords its members equal access to certain rights, liberties, and protections under the law.
u154 [T1 R2 C2] Strategies/approaches to Affect Change: Picketing; Boycotts; Lawsuits; Sit-ins; Voting; Marches; Holding elected office; Lobbying; Armed resistance; Hunger strike; Advertising; Social media campaigns; Walk-outs Organizing Societal Reforms Temperance Movement; Mental health/healthcare; Prison reform; Immigration rights; Sovereign rights of Indigenous tribes; Abolitionism; Voting; Labor conditions; Integration of public accommodations; American Indian Movement (AIM); Asian American Political Alliance; Affirmative action; Gerrymandering; Civil Rights Act of 1964; Voting Rights Act of 1965; NAACP Limits to Civil Rights Poll taxes; literacy test; grandfather clauses; Supreme Court cases - Plessy v. Ferguson “separate but equal”, Korematsu v. US; Jim Crow Laws; Klux Klan (KKK); Black Codes
=== page 18 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u157 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u158 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u159 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to explain strategies used in societal reforms and efforts to address discrimination after the Civil War. Students will be able to explain how laws and civic action expanded or restricted civil rights between Reconstruction and the civil rights era. Students will be able to explain causes and effects of conflicts within the United States between Reconstruction and the civil rights era. Students will be able to identify common sources of international conflict.
u160 [T1 R2 C2] Expansion of Rights Suffrage; 13th, 14th, and 15th amendments; Freedman’s Bureau; NAACP; Naturalization; Brown v. Board of Education Causes and Effects of National Conflict: Population redistribution; State’s rights; Slavery; Land expansion; Land disputes; Annexation; Federalism; Taxation without representation; Congressional representation; Political balance in congress; Discrimination; Disenfranchisement; Civil Rights; Civil Rights legislation; Wage and labor disputes; Environment; Resource allocation Examples of Conflicts (National/International) Federalist/Anti-Federalists; Indigenous rights; National Bank; Labor unions; Internment camps; Domestic and international wars; Indian removal; Suffrage; Spanish-American War; Economic impacts of war; Great Depression; World Wars; Cold War; Korean War Common Sources of International Conflict: • Trade/economic policy • Border disputes/U.S. expansion • Human rights • Holocaust – History of Antisemitism; Pre-war Jewish life; WWI and rise of fascism; US response; Eugenics; Bystanders; Upstanders; Nuremburg trials; Creation of UN • Genocide examples - Indigenous peoples; Armenia; Mao Tse-Tung’s Cultural Revolution; The Rape of Nanking
=== page 19 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u163 Perspectives
u164 D2.His.4.6-8. Analyze multiple factors that influenced the perspectives of people during different historical eras.
u165 D2.His.5.6-8. Explain how and why perspectives of people have changed over time.
u166 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u167 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u168 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to explain movements and reforms and their social, political, and economic impacts. Students will be able to identify factors that led to the civil rights movement. Students will be able to analyze examples of conflict, compromise, cooperation, and the pursuit of social justice from multiple perspectives over time from Reconstruction to the civil rights era.
u169 [T1 R2 C2] Movements/Reforms: • Progressive Era – Women’s Suffrage movement, Prohibition (18th and 21st Amendments), Muckrakers and investigative journalism • Legal challenges – Brown v. Board of Ed, Civil Rights Act of 1964, Voting Rights Act of 1965 • Social Movements – sit-ins, marches, Montgomery Bus Boycott Factors the Led to Civil Rights Movement: segregation and Jim Crow laws; lack of voting rights; violence and injustice; wars and returning Black veterans; growth of non-White middle class; media awareness; Supreme Court cases Conflict, Compromise, Cooperation: class, gender, religious, regional, and racial; Class conflict and labor movement; AFL-CIO; Gender and suffrage movements; Korematsu v. US; Civil Rights movement; Civil Rights Act of 1964; Indian reorganization Act of 1934; Voting Rights Act International Cooperation: Considerations: Nation-states, Interaction among nation-states; U.S. relations with other nation-states; Major governmental, nongovernmental international organizations; Impact of the American concept of democracy, individual rights on the world; The influence of other nations on American politics, society; Effects of significant world political, demographic, environmental developments, and trends on the United States; The United Nations - purpose and function.
=== page 20 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u172 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u173 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u174 [T1 R2 C1] Continue Students will be able to identify how U.S. has cooperated with other nations on issues over time.
u175 [T1 R2 C2] Examples: • International Trade and Diplomacy (Post-Civil War): After the Civil War, the U.S. worked to rebuild trade with Europe and expand into new global markets. Example: U.S. opened trade relationships in Asia and Latin America, helping grow its economy. • Spanish-American War and Treaty of Paris (1898): U.S. and Spain signed a peace treaty after war; U.S. gained Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines. • World War I (1917–1918): U.S. joined the Allied Powers (Britain, France, etc.) to fight Germany. After the war, President Wilson promoted the League of Nations (an early idea of global cooperation), though the U.S. didn’t officially join. Example of international negotiation, though it also raised debates about U.S. imperialism. • World War II (1941–1945): The U.S. allied with the United Kingdom, Soviet Union, France, and China to defeat Nazi Germany and Japan. Major example of military and economic cooperation through the Allied Powers. • United Nations (Founded 1945): After WWII, the U.S. helped create the United Nations, a global organization for peace, health, and human rights. The U.S. became a permanent member of the UN Security Council. • Marshall Plan (1948): U.S. gave billions of dollars to help European countries rebuild after WWII. Goal: prevent the spread of communism and support global economic stability.
u176 Causation and Argumentation
u177 D2.His.14.6-8. Explain multiple causes and effects of events and developments in the past.
u178 D2.His.15.6-8. Evaluate the relative influence of various causes of events and developments in the past.
=== page 21 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u181 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u182 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u183 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to explain US reactions to conflicts both at home and abroad from Reconstruction to the civil rights era. Students will be able to explain historic events to recognize power, authority, religion, economics, and governance as they relate to oppression and impact on groups in America from Reconstruction to the civil rights era.
u184 [T1 R2 C2] • Cold War Cooperation (1950s–60s): Cold War involved tension – the U.S. formed alliances like NATO with European nations to ensure collective security. • World War I: US initially neutral; German sub attacks • World War II: Pearl Harbor, Japanese internment, Holocaust, McCarthyism, nuclear weapons, space race, ‘red scare’, fear of communism; atomic bomb; post War NATO creation and Marshall Plan • Cold War: US v. USSR, capitalism v. Communism; proxy wars (Korea, and early Vietnam); McCarthyism • Korean War: containment of Communism; armistice • Vietnam War: containment of Communism; draft dodgers; chemical warfare; US Protests; first war on nightly news • Historic Events Recognizing Oppression: Reconstruction era; Disenfranchisement; Chinese Exclusion Act; Jim Crow laws; Triangle Shirtwaist Factory Fire; The Great Depression; Japanese Internment; Civil Rights movement
=== page 22 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u187 Resources
u188 The American Revolution- PBS Learning Media: This Ken Burns series offers media clips with lessons for grades 6-8: “Demographics of the British Colonies”, Native Americans and British Colonial America: Sovereignty, Diplomacy, and Resistance”, and “Patriot, Loyalist Neutral: Differing Perspectives on the American Revolution”.
u189 African Americans in the Gilded Age - Bill of Rights Institute: Constitutional amendments were ratified during and after the Civil War to protect the natural and civil rights of African Americans. Despite these legal protections, the condition of African Americans significantly worsened in the last few decades of the nineteenth century. In this 120-minute lesson, Students will trace and evaluate efforts to achieve equality and protect the natural rights of blacks during the period following the Civil War and analyze primary source documents and respond to a document-based question concerning efforts to achieve racial equality.
u190 An Uphill Battle: Fighting Injustice on the Homefront During WWI - National Archives Harry S. Truman Museum: Students will rotate through four learning centers where they will read primary and secondary sources about injustices during World War I. This will culminate in brainstorming solutions to each type of injustice.
u191 Civil Rights Movement: The Declaration’s Influence - PBS Learning Media: In this interactive lesson, students explore key speeches given by Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., during the 1960s civil rights movement. They will analyze how he employed language to connect the movement to the Declaration of Independence and to justify its goals.
u192 Fighting for the Right to Fight - The National World War II Museum: This middle school guide provides an introductory essay, profiles of prominent wartime African Americans, and three primary source-based lesson plans.
u193 Korea’s Place in Teaching Social Studies - World History Digital Education. In partnership with the National Council for Social Studies (NCSS), the World History Digital Education Foundation offers a set of free resources for social studies teachers to incorporate lessons on the history, geography, economy, and civic society of the Republic of Korea. The Learning Module is composed of four modules: History, Geography, Economics, and Civics; each content area provides inquiry lessons, resources, and activities.
u194 No Turning Back - Mission US: A Public Media Project: Mission U.S. is an award- winning media project that immerses young people in transformational moments in US history; teacher guide. Estimated time: 2-2.5 hrs. The year is 1960. You are 16-year-old Verna Baker, born and raised in the Mississippi Delta. As you move to the city of Greenwood to
=== page 23 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u197 start high school, a movement for civil rights is gaining momentum. How will you take part in the struggle for freedom and equality?
u198 Prisoner in My Homeland - Mission U.S.: A Public Media Project: Mission U.S. is an award-winning media project that immerses young people in transformational moments in U.S. history; teacher guide. ESTIMATED TIME: 1.5-2 HOURS The year is 1941. You are 16-year-old Henry Tanaka. When the government forces you and 120,000 other innocent Japanese Americans into camps, how will you react?
u199 Pushing Towards Civil Rights - iCivics: This curriculum unit covers the following topics for either grades 6-8 or 9-12: Slavery, Civil War, Reconstruction, Jim Crow Era, Progressive Era, Women’s Suffrage, Civil Rights Movement, Black Power Movement. Lessons and “Quests” are aligned to the C3 standards; videos, additional resources, and infographics also provided. All resources are free, but teachers need to create an educator account.
u200 Reconstruction: Middle School Inquiry - American Battlefield Trust: In this inquiry lesson, students will respond to the question “What are the outcomes of the period known as Reconstruction?” Students will develop a hypothesis, search for evidence in multiple primary and secondary sources, and complete a graphic organizer. Two opportunities for assessment are provided: storyboard and inquiry response (oral or written).
u201 Teach- United States Holocaust Memorial Museum - The USHMM provides the fundamentals of Teaching the Holocaust, Teaching Materials by Topic, Online teaching Resources, Professional Development, Videos, Poster Sets, and general support for teaching the Holocaust in a non-partisan manner.
u202 Teaching with Historic Places - National Parks Service: Place-based learning puts “place” – a historic structure, an archaeological site, a cultural landscape, or National Park – at the center of the story. By rooting the study of the past in the physical geography, the Teaching with Historic Places program help learners more deeply connect to their local community as well as communities across the country. Find lessons archived by time period, state, or various themes- such as African American History, American Presidents, Civil Rights, and Conservation.
u203 The Lost Promise of Reconstruction and the Rise of Jim Crow, 1860-1896 - Bill of Rights Institute: This lesson asks students to look at primary source documents as they consider the following question: To what extent did Founding principles of liberty, equality, and justice become a reality for African Americans from Reconstruction to the end of the nineteenth century? The Civil War ended slavery, and African Americans were in a position to claim their natural rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. But would that happen?
=== page 24 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u206 The National WWI Museum and Memorial - Search this site by topic (i.e., economics, geography, politics), resource type (i.e., curriculum, lesson plan, video), and grade-band for classroom materials focused on teaching about WWI.
u207 The Vermont 250th in the Classroom - The purpose of this document is to provide lessons and resources to engage students in learning about the founding of the nation and the critical role that Vermont and Vermonters played in the War for Independence and the legacy they left on America. Members of the 250th Education Committee have identified lessons and resources that align with the four themes established by the Vermont 250th Commission on which to focus the commemoration of the Semiquincentennial; suggested grades have also been provided for upper Elementary, Middle, and High school students.
u208 Voting Trends in America, 1964-2020 - Statistics in Schools: This activity is designed to be part of a unit on the U.S. Constitution, as it focuses on U.S. voting trends. Students will analyze bar and line graphs showing the percentages of people (by race, age, sex, region, and education) who voted in elections between 1964 and 2020. Students will use these data to respond to the question “Who votes in American elections?”
u209 Wilmington 1898 Education - PBS Learning Media: A variety of interactive resources and lessons that tell the story of the people, communities, and actions that defined the city of Wilmington, North Carolina in the decades following the Civil War, as well as the political factors that led to the only successful coup in U.S. history. Designed to accompany the PBS NC-produced American Experience episode "American Coup: Wilmington 1898," this collection includes segments from that film, as well as original videos and animations.
u210 Women’s Suffrage - Learning for Justice: In this lesson, students will understand that until the Nineteenth Amendment was ratified, use primary and secondary sources to understand the ways that women advocated for the right to vote, and evaluate the importance of the federal government in securing women's right to vote.
u211 Women’s Suffrage in the United States - Teach a Girl to Lead- Rutgers University: The goal of this module is to provide resources and information about the history of women’s vote in the U.S. Looking at the women’s suffrage movement provides a framework for exploring the changing role of women in politics and society in the 19th and 20th centuries. The history of suffrage offers an opportunity to examine women’s roles at critical points in the nation’s history, and to think about the impact of women’s voting behavior on politics in our time.
u212 Choices in Little Rock - Facing History and Ourselves - This unit examines attempts to integrate Little Rock Central High School in 1957. It explores the impact of the choices of the Little Rock Nine as well as those of leaders, the media, and community members.
=== page 25 === [running header: Grade 7 - The U.S. and Vermont - From Reconstruction to the Civil Righ]
u215 The Individual and Society - Facing History and Ourselves - How does our society shape the way we define ourselves and others? Explore some of the dilemmas people experience when others perceive them differently than they define themselves.
