=== page 1 ===
u1 LEADERSHIP | SUPPORT | OVERSIGHT (802) 828-1130 | education.vermont.gov
u2 Kindergarten – Me and My Community (Draft)
u3 Overview
u4 The focus of kindergarten is to provide students with opportunities to explore topics that affect them and their personal environments. These include basic citizenship skills such as rule making and compliance, and how these change in different settings (school, home, community). Students will engage in learning about themselves, their schools, their cities/towns, and local communities. They will also develop an awareness of the similarities and differences among individuals in the classroom as well as within the school and community. Students will have the opportunity to compare how life in the past is different from today, with respect to their own experiences within their home, classroom, and community.
u5 Looking Ahead
u6 In grade 1, students will learn how they are connected to the world around them and develop a deeper understanding of how diverse cultures, values, and beliefs help to shape the world in which we live.
u7 Inquiry
u8 Why inquiry? Using inquiry as an instructional model for the teaching of social studies allows students to authentically ask questions, search for and analyze evidence, and provide explanations and arguments to challenges facing their world.
u9 The inquiry instructional model is driven by authentic questions or problems that have relevance for children. Students learn content, skills, and dispositions as they seek answers to questions and as they apply their learning to take informed action. Pioneered by Dewey (1938), inquiry is an attempt to make classroom experiences feel more like the authentic, curiosity-driven experiences that motivate learning outside of school. (Using Inquiry to Prepare Students for College, Career, and Civic Life, elementary edition, p. 22)
u10 Contact: Martha Deiss, Curriculum & Instruction Division, at Martha.Deiss@vermont.gov
=== page 2 === [running header: Kindergarten – Me and My Community (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025]
u11 The Inquiry Arc is defined in Dimension 1 (questioning) of the College, Career, and Civic Life (C3) Framework for Social Studies State Standards. In this Framework, Dimension 3 (evidence sourcing), and Dimension 4 (communicating), as well as some evidence indicators found within Dimension 2 – History, have been combined with Dimension 1 into a singular Inquiry Process, as evidenced below. This Inquiry Process begins in the elementary grades and increases in depth and complexity as it spans through high school, preparing students to spiral their learning and skill acquisition in the social studies for college and career readiness.
u12 Inquiry Process: Students act as social scientists as they ask questions, think critically, solve problems, and share conclusions.
u13 C3 Indicators (K-2):
u14 • Constructing Compelling and Supporting Questions: D1.1, 2, 3 • Gathering and Evaluating Sources: D2. His. 9, 10, 13, 17; D3. 1 • Communicating and Critiquing Solutions: D2. His. 16; D4. 1
u15 Overarching Kindergarten Themes:
u16 • American Ideals • Work and Commerce • Connections • Shared Traditions
=== page 3 === [running header: Kindergarten – Me and My Community (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025]
u19 Civics
u20 Theme: American Ideals
u21 Civic and Political Institutions:
u22 D2.Civ.1.K-2. Describe roles and responsibilities of people in authority.
u23 D2.Civ.3.K-2. Explain the need for and purposes of rules in various settings inside and outside of school.
u24 D2.Civ.6.K-2. Describe how communities work to accomplish common tasks, establish responsibilities, and fulfill roles of
u25 Authority.
u26 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u27 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u28 [T1 R2 C1] Students will understand that children and adults have rights and responsibilities at home, at school, in the classroom, and in the community.
u29 [T1 R2 C2] • Children have classroom responsibilities. • Considerate classmates are good citizens. • Children and adults have responsibilities at school and at home. • People can be citizens of a school, neighborhood, state, the United States, and/or a home country. • Communities have rules and routines. • Communities and organizations can identify and elect leaders. • Leaders serve in various roles within the community. • Students can be leaders. • Belonging/acceptance in a group.
=== page 4 === [running header: Kindergarten – Me and My Community (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025]
u32 Civic Virtues and Democratic Principles: Applying Civic Virtues and Democratic Principles
u33 D2.Civ.7.K-2. Apply civic virtues when participating in school settings.
u34 D2.Civ.8.K-2. Describe democratic principles such as equality, fairness, and respect for legitimate authority and rules.
u35 D2.Civ.9.K-2. Follow agreed-upon rules for discussions while responding attentively to others when addressing ideas and making decisions as a group.
u36 D2.Civ.10.K-2. Compare their own point of view with others’ perspectives.
u37 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u38 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u39 [T1 R2 C1] Students will explain the benefits and challenges of cooperation and rules within communities. Students will understand how ensuring that everyone’s voice is heard supports the classroom community. Students will identify ways to address a need or a goal as a group.
u40 [T1 R2 C2] • People use honesty, mutual respect, social responsibility, and cooperation and pay attention to other perspectives when interacting with others. • People demonstrate respect for the rights of others. • Individuals have the same basic human rights. • People share common characteristics. • People are unique and different. • People learn from families. • Teachers and others help students learn. • People have various strengths and abilities. • People can have different opinions. • Communities can have problems and issues to be addressed. • People can work together to resolve conflicts and problems (executive function skills). • Children communicate with individuals and in groups by identifying feelings that might lead to interpersonal conflicts (executive function skills).
=== page 5 === [running header: Kindergarten – Me and My Community (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025]
u43 Rules, Processes, and Laws
u44 D2.Civ.11.K-2. Explain how people can work together to make decisions in the classroom.
u45 D2.Civ.12.K-2. Identify and explain how rules function in public (classroom and school) settings.
u46 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u47 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u48 [T1 R2 C1] Students will understand that people make and change rules for many reasons. Students will identify examples of rules in the school and neighborhood community and explain why they exist. Students will describe incentives for following rules and consequences for breaking rules.
u49 [T1 R2 C2] • Rules are different in different places. • Taking turns is respectful. • Classrooms are organized for student learning. • A school community helps children learn. • Many people work in schools and have different jobs and responsibilities. • Members of the classroom and school deserve respect. • Citizens are members of communities. • Children can help create classroom rules.
u50 Resources
u51 Civics for All: From the NYC DOE, comes this resource-rich guide of lesson plans and projects covering American Ideals, Rights and Responsibilities, and Role of the Individual.
=== page 6 === [running header: Kindergarten – Me and My Community (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025]
u54 C3 IDM - Rules: This inquiry engages kindergartners in exploring the various ways people interact with and act upon rules and laws in society. The compelling question “Are all rules good rules?” assumes that while students generally enter school with some concept of rules and what it means to follow or break them, they may not yet understand who makes rules and how they change.
u55 History’s Mysteries - How do Communities Make Good Decisions?: In this unit, students will solve three mysteries using evidence from primary sources including, 1) “What does it mean to belong to a group?”, 2) What does it mean to be a citizen?”, and 3) How do groups make decisions?” Students will act as investigators to solve the mysteries, which helps students understand themselves and their connections to their communities, including the ideas and process of voting and why it is important.
u56 Learning for Justice - Part of a Community Online: This lesson focuses on helping young children learn to participate in different kinds of digital communities. Students will solidify and work on what they know about being part of any community.
u57 National Endowment for the Humanities - The Statue of Liberty: The Meaning and Use of a National Symbol: Students will learn the history of the Statue of Liberty and the evolving meaning of its symbolism. The focus is to understand symbols as students study the Statue of Liberty, complete research on a national symbol, and use their research to communicate a message of their own.
u58 PBS Learning Media - America, Our Country/Arthur: In these episodes from the PBS KIDS series ARTHUR, students examine the United States of America - the reasons it was founded, its citizens, and the symbols that represent its values.
u59 PBS Learning Media: Together We Can is a unique live-action music video series that supports children as they move through the developmental stages of “me” (a focus on the self), to “we” (a focus on the self and immediate other), to “us” (a focus on their wider surroundings). Through fun, upbeat, and engaging songs, this series explores ideas and concepts about American Democracy and Civics.
u60 PBS Learning Media – Xavier Riddle - Talking About Life Lessons: Xavier Riddle and his friends explore values and skills such as compassion, perseverance, responsibility, and gratitude in these video clips supported with teacher materials.
=== page 7 === [running header: Kindergarten – Me and My Community (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025]
u63 Economics
u64 Note: National Economy and Global Economy Global Economy Indicators are not in kindergarten in this scope and sequence and will be addressed/assessed in grade 2.
u65 Theme: Work and Commerce
u66 Economic Decision Making
u67 D2.Eco.1.K-2. Explain how scarcity necessitates decision making.
u68 D2.Eco.2.K-2. Identify the benefits and costs of making various personal decisions.
u69 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u70 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u71 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to differentiate between needs and wants. Students will be able to explain why people earn, spend, and save money.
u72 [T1 R2 C2] • Family members care for and help each other. • Families have basic needs and wants (safety, economic decisions, etc.). • Family members make choices to meet their needs and wants. • People in neighborhoods rely on each other for goods, services, and assistance. • Needs (food, rent) are different than wants (toys). • Scarcity is the condition of not being able to have all of the goods and services that a person wants or needs
=== page 8 === [running header: Kindergarten – Me and My Community (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025]
u75 Exchange and Markets
u76 D2.Eco.3.K-2. Describe the skills and knowledge required to produce certain goods and services.
u77 D2.Eco.4.K-2. Describe the goods and services that people in the local community produce and those that are produced in other communities.
u78 D2.Eco.5.K-2. Identify prices of products in a local market.
u79 D2.Eco.6.K-2. Explain how people earn income.
u80 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u81 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u82 [T1 R2 C1] Students will identify economic activities and resources in the local community. Students will describe ways in which people exchange money for goods.
u83 [T1 R2 C2] • Recognize and count using different coin values. • Vermont has specific economic activities and resources, such as maple sugaring, skiing, and eco-tourism. • Family members have different jobs and responsibilities. • People pay for goods and services. • People work in neighborhoods and have different jobs and responsibilities (police, store owners, sanitation workers, firefighters).
=== page 9 === [running header: Kindergarten – Me and My Community (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025]
u86 Resources
u87 C3 IDM - Needs and Wants: This annotated inquiry focuses on the economics concept of scarcity by developing an understanding of needs and wants and goods and services through the compelling question, “Can we ever get everything we need and want?” The distinctions between these constructs serve as the necessary components of an examination of the choices people must make when faced with potential limitations.
u88 PBS Learning Media - City Island: Short videos, with catchy tunes to introduce concepts like “What is Money?”, “Garbage,” and “Messy Jobs.”
u89 PBS Learning Media - Garbage: In this media-rich lesson featuring LOOP SCOOPS videos, students consider how the concept of "needs" vs. "wants" can help them think about ways to protect Earth's natural resources by reducing, reusing, and recycling materials.
u90 PBS Learning Media - $martpath Good Boy! (Goods vs. Services): This 5-minute video is supplemented with teacher support resources.
=== page 10 === [running header: Kindergarten – Me and My Community (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025]
u93 Geography
u94 Note: Human Population: Spatial Patterns and Movements and Changing Spatial Patterns Indicators are not in kindergarten in this scope and sequence and will be addressed and assessed in grades 1 and 2.
u95 Theme: Connections
u96 Geographic Representations: Spatial Views of the World
u97 D2.Geo.1.K-2. Construct maps, graphs, and other representations of familiar places.
u98 D2.Geo.2.K-2. Use maps, graphs, photographs, and other representations to describe places and the relationships and interactions that shape them.
u99 D2.Geo.3.K-2. Use maps, globes, and other simple geographic models to identify cultural and environmental characteristics of places.
u100 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u101 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u102 [T1 R2 C1] Students will describe where things are located. Students will identify familiar places both in a community and on a map. Students will understand the function of a map.
u103 [T1 R2 C2] • Communities have unique features and special purpose buildings (homes, schools, businesses, places of worship, libraries, parks, police/fire station, museums, hospitals). • Each student has their own physical address. • Buildings within a community have a physical address. • The purpose of an address. • Communities have landmarks, monuments, and architecture. Purpose of a map: • Define vocabulary that defines location in space (e.g., near, far, below, above). • Create a simple map and use it to find something.
=== page 11 === [running header: Kindergarten – Me and My Community (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025]
u106 Human-Environment Interaction: Place, Regions, and Culture
u107 D2.Geo.4.K-2. Explain how weather, climate, and other environmental characteristics affect people’s lives in a place or region.
u108 D2.Geo.5.K-2. Describe how human activities affect the cultural and environmental characteristics of places or regions.
u109 D2.Geo.6.K-2. Identify some cultural and environmental characteristics of specific place.
u110 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u111 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u112 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to describe the environmental characteristics of a community.
u113 [T1 R2 C2] • Environmental characteristics include climate and weather. • Physical features of a community can be changed by weather and climate.
u114 Resources
u115 Vermont FEED - Maple in Every School: Sample of activities to bring to the school to extend the students' maple education, including “Sugar Maker in the Classroom” and “Meet a Tree.”
u116 C3 IDM - Paper Maps: This inquiry leads students through an investigation of electronic and paper maps as representations of the physical world. In examining the different ways in which the two mediums reflect place and positionality, students should consider the utility and relative value of different geographic representations. Through interaction with the formative performance tasks and featured sources, students build their knowledge and understanding so that they are able to develop an argument that answers the compelling question “Do We Still Need Paper Maps?”
u117 National Geographic - Mapping the Classroom: Students practice using the language of location and then apply that language when creating a map of their classroom. They use the map to locate hidden items in the classroom.
=== page 12 === [running header: Kindergarten – Me and My Community (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025]
u120 KidCitizen - A Bird’s Eye View: Wondering with Maps: In this interactive lesson, students analyze a historic map and photos to learn how maps are more than just a way to represent a place on paper; maps also are sources that can be analyzed for how they are constructed and what they communicate.
u121 National Geographic - Places in the Park: Students explore a map of a park and use map symbols, a map key, and cardinal directions to analyze it.
u122 Shelburne Farms - How Are We Connected?: This downloadable resource cultivates an awareness and appreciation of what sustains us: our food, fiber, and relationships. This thread provides an opportunity to deepen our connection with our local food system. Beginning with our air, soil, water, and space, we begin the exploration of food, fiber, family and friends. We weave, knead, bake, and create products that we use and eat, and discover the joy of living with gratitude and in relationship to the world around us.
u123 Shelburne Farms - Who Lives Here?: A downloadable resource that introduces children to the people, plants, and animals of their place. By asking and exploring the question, “Who lives here?” children discover how our human, natural, and agricultural communities are interdependent. Children will develop a strong understanding and sense of community and place, as well as begin to grasp how they are interdependent—no matter where they live.
u124 C3 IDM - Maps and Globes: This inquiry leads students through an investigation of maps and globes as tools that represent the physical world in different ways. In the inquiry, students consider how each tool represents locations, what purposes each tool serves, and what advantages and disadvantages each tool offers. The study of maps and globes provides the foundation for students to develop an understanding of how and why humans interact with geography and geographic features across time and space. The manner in which students gather, use, and interpret evidence should increase their geographic reasoning and allow them to make and support their arguments in response to the compelling question, “Which is better, a map or a globe?”
=== page 13 === [running header: Kindergarten – Me and My Community (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025]
u127 History
u128 Note: C3 indicators for Historical Sources and Evidence are woven into the Inquiry Process.
u129 Perspectives Indicators are not assessed in kindergarten in this scope and sequence and will have opportunities for assessment within the K-2 grade-band in grades 1 and 2.
u130 Theme: Shared Traditions
u131 Change, Continuity, and Context
u132 D2.His.1.K-2. Create a chronological sequence of multiple events.
u133 D2.His.2.K-2. Compare life in the past to life today.
u134 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u135 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u136 [T1 R2 C1] Students reference time in the past, present, and future to explain how they have observed change (classroom, community, school, stories). Students will be able to use sequence and chronological terms when describing past events.
u137 [T1 R2 C2] • Events can be identified as past, present, or future. • Concepts of time measurement include: o Days o Weeks o Months o Years • Key Sequence and Chronological Terms • Visual Timelines • Timeline illustrating key events in a story or a historical event
=== page 14 === [running header: Kindergarten – Me and My Community (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025]
u140 Causation and Argumentation
u141 D2.His.14.K-2. Generate possible reasons for an event or development in the past.
u142 D2.His.16.K-2. Select which reasons might be more likely than others to explain a historical event or development.
u143 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u144 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u145 [T1 R2 C1] Students will identify cause and effect.
u146 [T1 R2 C2] • Outcome – what happens after people make a choice or do something alone or together. • Observation – listening and looking to learn about people and places. • Evidence – things you see or hear to show that something is true.
u147 Resources
u148 C3 IDM - Holidays: This inquiry encourages kindergartners to expand their study of self and others by deepening their understanding of the role of traditions, holidays, and symbols in establishing cultural identity and unity. The compelling question “What makes holidays special?” reflects an enduring conversation about how and why people engage in ritual and tradition. It is respectful of kindergartners’ intellectual efforts as they are likely to be interested in knowing more about traditions and holidays and are likely to have a meaningful entry point into the discussion based upon personal experiences.
u149 C3 IDM - Identity: This inquiry leads students through an investigation of self by recognizing that all humans have both unique and similar characteristics. By investigating the compelling question “Is everyone unique?” students begin to see how they are similar to and different from their classmates. The study of similarities and differences among individuals provides the foundation for students to demonstrate their understanding of and respect for others.
u150 History’s Mysteries - How Do We Celebrate Our Shared Traditions?: In this unit, students will solve four historical mysteries using evidence from primary sources including 1) “Where is the history in a name?”, 2) “What shared traditions make your family special?”, 3) “Why do we have a day off from school?”, and 4) “How does a tradition become a holiday?” Students will explore naming traditions, family traditions, civic versus religious holidays, and lastly, the story of Juneteenth and how it has become a holiday celebrated across America.
=== page 15 === [running header: Kindergarten – Me and My Community (Draft) (Revised: November 12, 2025]
u153 History’s Mysteries - What is the Difference Between Then and Now?: In this unit, students will explore three mysteries, 1) “What is the difference between then and now?”, 2) “Where do people work?”, and 3) “How is work different now than in the past?” Students will explore primary source images from the Library of Congress to solve historical mysteries with evidence.
u154 iCivics - How Do We Celebrate Our Shared Traditions?: Traditions can be large or small. Kids may be familiar with certain traditions. This unit allows them to explore more. They will have the opportunity to identify traditions that are important to their family, learn about naming traditions, and discuss holidays.
u155 iCivics - What Is the Difference Between Then and Now?: In this unit, students analyze primary images from the past and compare them to those from today. Students will have the opportunity to learn how people, work, and familiar objects have changed over time.
u156 KidCitizen - Community Helpers: In this interactive lesson, students will learn how community helpers have changed and stayed the same over time by exploring a photograph of a man delivering ice to a schoolhouse around 1900 and investigate who community helpers are.
u157 Learning for Justice - What Is a Family?: This lesson provides a framework that will help students talk about their own and others’ families in safe, caring ways.
u158 PBS Learning Media Habitats and Discoveries: Images of the Past: In this lesson, your students will participate in a hands-on observation challenge that will encourage them to look closer at the habitats around them.
u159 PBS Learning Media - The Fred T. Korematsu Institute - How Are We Defined as Americans?: In this lesson, the students will explore what it means to them to be an American. They will reflect on their own identities and family histories to better understand their experience. Individually and as a group, students will develop a definition of what it means to be an American and add to that definition throughout the year.
