=== page 1 ===
u1 LEADERSHIP | SUPPORT | OVERSIGHT (802) 828-1130 | education.vermont.gov
u2 Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft)
u3 Overview
u4 In grade 1, students will learn how they are connected to the world around them and develop a deeper understanding of how diverse cultures, values, and beliefs help to shape the world in which we live. Students will further develop a sense of purpose and empathy regarding their role and the role of other citizens within the community and world. As a global citizen, it is developmentally appropriate for students to identify similarities and differences from others (cultural, likes and dislikes, gender, skin color, hair, and eye color). Best practice is having materials and visuals that are representative of people, cultures, and the community in which they live. They will have the opportunity to look for ways that they can be civic-minded and make change happen within their own classroom, school, and community. Students will develop an understanding of how basic economic concepts influence people, places, and the environment. They will learn that people not only use the environment to meet their needs and wants but also that the environment often dictates where and how people choose to live. Students will continue building group skills, including roles, rules, voicing an opinion, and conflict resolution skills with adult support. They will enhance their knowledge of spatial awareness of their surroundings by furthering the use of geographic representations, tools, and terminology to process information about the world around them. Students will continue to compare life in the past to life today as they study the contributions of historical figures and how those figures have helped shape and change various communities and environments across the globe.
u5 Looking Back and Looking Ahead
u6 Kindergarten – Me and My Community
u7 In kindergarten, students explored topics that affect them and their personal environments, learned basic citizenship skills, and engaged in learning about themselves, their schools, their cities/towns, and individuals in their local communities.
u8 Contact: Martha Deiss, Curriculum & Instruction Division, at Martha.Deiss@vermont.gov
=== page 2 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u9 Looking Ahead
u10 2nd Grade – The Americas
u11 In grade 2, students will expand on their understanding of the concept of community by exploring past and present interactions between groups of people in Central America, North America, South America, and the Caribbean. Students will explain continuities and differences among cultures, governments, traditions, and available resources to investigate how individuals work together while acknowledging different perspectives and cultivating empathy.
u12 Inquiry
u13 Why inquiry? Using inquiry as an instructional model for the teaching of social studies allows students to authentically ask questions, search for and analyze evidence, and provide explanations and arguments to challenges facing their world.
u14 The inquiry instructional model is driven by authentic questions or problems that have relevance for children. Students learn content, skills, and dispositions as they seek answers to questions and as they apply their learning to take informed action. Pioneered by Dewey (1938), inquiry is an attempt to make classroom experiences feel more like the authentic, curiosity-driven experiences that motivate learning outside of school. (Using Inquiry to Prepare Students for College, Career, and Civic Life, elementary edition, p. 22)
u15 The Inquiry Arc is defined in Dimension 1 (questioning) of the College, Career, and Civic Life (C3) Framework for Social Studies State Standards. In this Framework, Dimension 3 (evidence sourcing), and Dimension 4 (communicating), as well as some evidence indicators found within Dimension 2 – History, have been combined with Dimension 1 into a singular Inquiry Process, as evidenced below. This Inquiry Process begins in the elementary grades and increases in depth and complexity as it spans through high school, preparing students to spiral their learning and skill acquisition in the social studies for college and career readiness.
u16 Inquiry Process: Students act as social scientists as they ask questions, think critically, solve problems, and share conclusions.
=== page 3 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u19 C3 Indicators (K-2):
u20 • Constructing Compelling and Supporting Questions: D1.1, 2, 3 • Gathering and Evaluating Sources: D2. His. 9, 10, 13, 17; D3. 1 • Communicating and Critiquing Solutions: D2. His. 16; D4. 1
u21 Overarching Grade 1 Themes:
u22 • Roles and Responsibilities • Economic Choices • Geography’s Influence on Culture and the Environment • Past and Present
u23 Civics
u24 Theme: Roles and Responsibilities
u25 Civic and Political Institutions:
u26 D2.Civ.1.K-2. Describe roles and responsibilities of people in authority.
u27 D2.Civ.3.K-2. Explain the need for and purposes of rules in various settings inside and outside of school.
u28 D2.Civ.5.K-2. Explain what governments are and some of their functions.
u29 D2.Civ.6.K-2. Describe how communities work to accomplish common tasks, establish responsibilities, and fulfill roles of
u30 Authority.
=== page 4 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u33 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u34 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u35 [T1 R2 C1] Students will identify local community and government leaders that have roles and responsibilities to provide services for their community members. Students will be able to explain how communities have rules and people in charge to keep things fair and help everyone get what they need.
u36 [T1 R2 C2] • Different people serve in appointed and/or elected roles in governments. • Leaders have different roles and responsibilities. • Governments represent the needs of the people, create and enforce laws, and help to resolve conflicts. • Governments provide services (education, roads, parks, public safety). • Civic identity is shaped by symbolic figures, places, and events. • People elect officials to represent them. • Citizens help to form their government. • Voting determines who will be president and vice president. • The president is the leader of the country, and the vice president is second in charge. • Individuals work together to respect and uphold the rights of the self and others in the community. • Learners in the classroom community have rights (feeling safe, belonging, learning).
u37 Civic Virtues and Democratic Principles: Applying Civic Virtues and Democratic Principles
u38 D2.Civ.7.K-2. Apply civic virtues when participating in school settings.
u39 D2.Civ.8.K-2. Describe democratic principles such as equality, fairness, and respect for legitimate authority and rules.
u40 D2.Civ.9.K-2. Follow agreed-upon rules for discussions while responding attentively to others when addressing ideas and making decisions as a group.
u41 D2.Civ.10.K-2. Compare their own point of view with others’ perspectives.
=== page 5 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u44 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u45 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u46 [T1 R2 C1] Students will understand that children, families, and communities exhibit cultural similarities and differences. Students will be able to identify examples of freedom, respect, and safety in their community and explain how these contribute to the common good. Students will understand that culturally, ethnically, and racially diverse people help to shape a community.
u47 [T1 R2 C2] • Civic virtues include honesty, mutual respect, cooperation, attentiveness to multiple perspectives, empathy, and courage. • Democratic principles include equality, freedom, liberty, rights, deliberation, and consideration for the common good. • Rights can include individual rights and group rights (common good). • The United States is comprised of diverse cultural groups. • Cultural groups share traditions, beliefs, religions, and holidays. • A school is made up of diverse people. • People can belong to different groups. • People speak a native language. • People share ethnicity, culture, and religion.
=== page 6 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u50 Rules, Processes, and Laws
u51 D2.Civ.11.K-2. Explain how people can work together to make decisions in the classroom.
u52 D2.Civ.12.K-2. Identify and explain how rules function in public (classroom and school) settings.
u53 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u54 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u55 [T1 R2 C1] Students will identify examples of how individual actions (such as volunteering or voting) and government decisions (like making laws or providing services) help create order and promote peace in their community. Students will be able to identify characteristics of effective rules and participate in a process to establish classroom rules. Students can participate in problem solving, decision making and conflict resolution within their home, school, and community. Students will understand that outcomes to conflict or disagreements based on different beliefs, culture, and values can be achieved through compromise and cooperation. Students will describe how individuals can bring about change.
u56 [T1 R2 C2] • There are differences between a rule and a law. • Various people make laws/rules. • There are consequences for not following laws/rules. • Laws/rules are not the same everywhere. • Various people enforce laws/rules. • There are differences between rights (freedoms of speech and religions) and responsibilities (paying taxes, obeying the law). • People can bring about change in the classroom and/or community.
=== page 7 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u59 Resources
u60 American Bar Association - Taking a Stand: Students will understand that citizens take stands on issues and explore ways to advocate for those issues. Pearl Moscowitz’s Last Stand is utilized in the lesson; it can be accessed through a video reading from the Cayton Children’s Museum.
u61 C3 IDM - Friendship: This inquiry leads students through an investigation of early social interactions and behaviors. By investigating the compelling question “Do I have to like everyone?”, students evaluate friendship, what is a friend, how to be a friend, and how to respond when you dislike someone or they dislike you. Students will develop a deeper understanding of friendship(s). The formative performance tasks build on knowledge and skills through the course of the inquiry and help students create their own understanding of friendships and how to treat everyone fairly. Students create an evidence-based informative argument about whether or not they need to like everyone and appropriate behaviors.
u62 C3 IDM - Global Citizen: This first grade annotated inquiry highlights the idea that even primary-age children can begin thinking about their civic roles in their communities and beyond. Those roles can be made real and vital to young children by exploring the traits or characteristics that represent responsible citizenship. Those traits – respecting others, behaving honestly, helping others, making and obeying rules and laws, being informed, and sharing needed resources – will be familiar to students through their experiences in their home and school lives.
u63 C3 IDM - The President: This inquiry engages first graders in exploring the meaning and purpose and function of government through the compelling question “Is the president the most important person in government?” Assuming that most first graders know who the president is, this inquiry is designed to help students explore the different levels of governmental leadership and the idea that other authority figures exist in addition to the president. In learning about the levels of government and the issues each deals with, students should consider their own ideas for desired change within their communities (e.g., more recreational space, better roads, more variety in school lunches) and develop a commitment to civic participation.
u64 iCivics - How Can Perseverance Help Me Be a Good Citizen?: The way students respond when things are challenging can be the difference between success and failure. But it’s not easy to practice a civic virtue like perseverance. This unit introduces students to behaviors they can use to work through challenges and offers the real-life examples of Wilma Rudolph and Katherine Johnson demonstrating perseverance for students to explore.
=== page 8 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u67 iCivics - How Do Communities Make Good Decisions?: In this unit, students will be introduced to citizenship and leadership. Students will work together to create a classroom book on the rights and responsibilities of citizenship. Students will have the opportunity to practice citizenship by voting, recounting, and coming together for the common good.
u68 iCivics - What Makes a Good Leader?: In this unit, students will explore leaders in their community and identify leadership traits. Students will then learn about President George Washington and identify the qualities that made people believe he would be a good first leader for the United States. Finally, students will learn about the life of Ona Judge, and examine one way in which leaders stand up for important things.
u69 iCivics - Private i History Detectives Civic Virtues Collection: In the new Private i History Detectives Civic Virtues Collection, students learn about civic virtue champions and practice civic virtues in their own lives and in the classroom. Throughout these units, students will discover the untold stories of important and influential figures who lived out civic virtue in their own lives. They will also gain the skills they need to understand each other’s ideas and have opportunities to bring their own experiences into the learning.
u70 KidCitizen - Children in Action: From recycling materials during World War II to wearing masks during the COVID-19 pandemic, children have helped meet community goals during times of need. In this interactive episode, students draw upon their observations and reflections to explore how children have contributed to recycling efforts in the past and present.
u71 KidCitizen - Congress and Milk: Congress is a group of people who work together to make laws for our country. They are elected by the people to represent their interests and make decisions about important issues. We will explore one way that Congress affects children's daily life at school.
u72 National Park Service - National Parks Legacy: Nature and Culture…NPS Protects Both!: This lesson teaches students how the National Park Service protects both nature and culture as students engage with the changing landscapes of Yellowstone national Park and Mesa Verde.
u73 PBS Learning Media - Arthur’s Park Game: Students practice taking action to improve our world by playing ARTHUR’s Park, a digital game. In order to create a new park in an empty lot, Arthur has to make a speech to raise awareness, hold a bake sale to make money, and then equip the park. As students play each round, set in a board game format, they accumulate stars that allow them to “buy” what they need for the new park. They also recognize the importance of making a plan to achieve one’s goals.
=== page 9 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u76 PBS Learning Media - My Vote Counts Lesson Plan: In this lesson from the PBS KIDS series ARTHUR, students learn about elections and to voice their preferences by voting.
u77 PBS Learning Media - Stand Up, Sit In, Speak Out: In this lesson from the PBS KIDS series ARTHUR, students examine activism and how ordinary people can be part of powerful collective movements that bring change. Students watch “Arthur Takes a Stand” and discuss taking action against things they believe are unjust. They map out the characters’ actions, noting that multiple voices bring power and opportunities for change. Then, they listen to a story about the reasons people protest and are introduced to important movements in our country’s history. Finally, they explore different ways people take action and brainstorm a list of issues in their own community that they would like to change.
u78 PBS Learning Media – Xavier Riddle: Talking About Life Lessons: Xavier Riddle and his friends explore values and skills such as compassion, perseverance, responsibility, and gratitude in these video clips supported with teacher materials.
u79 PBS Learning Media – You, Me, and Community: This collection includes resources related to civics & government, geography, economics, and history. All resources are available in English, and some are available in Spanish. No student is too young to learn how to become civically engaged. Introduce young learners to basic civics concepts—including making their voice heard and exploring the process of voting.
=== page 10 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u82 Economics
u83 Note: National Economy Indicators are not in grade 1 in this scope and sequence and will be addressed/assessed in grade 2.
u84 Theme: Economic Choices
u85 Economic Decision Making
u86 D2.Eco.1.K-2. Explain how scarcity necessitates decision making.
u87 D2.Eco.2.K-2. Identify the benefits and costs of making various personal decisions.
u88 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u89 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u90 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to identify choices and decisions for various uses of money (spending, saving, sharing, contributing). Students will be able to use cost-benefit analysis (i.e., weigh positives and negatives) of two choices to make a decision.
u91 [T1 R2 C2] Choices and Decisions • Sources of income • Needs and wants • Identify multiple forms of U.S. money • Means of transaction • Volunteering • Different jobs in different communities • Scarcity • Opportunity costs
=== page 11 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u94 Exchange and Markets
u95 D2.Eco.3.K-2. Describe the skills and knowledge required to produce certain goods and services.
u96 D2.Eco.4.K-2. Describe the goods and services that people in the local community produce and those that are produced in other communities.
u97 D2.Eco.5.K-2. Identify prices of products in a local market.
u98 D2.Eco.6.K-2. Explain how people earn income.
u99 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u100 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u101 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to identify prices of goods in a local market. Students will be able to describe the goods and services produced in the local community. Students will be able to identify sources of income. Students will identify how goods and services are exchanged within Vermont communities.
u102 [T1 R2 C2] • Goods (maple syrup, cheddar cheese) and services (firefighter, teacher) • Sources of income • Value • People can be consumers and producers. • Local economic activities aid the national economy (e.g., VT maple syrup). • Economy is a system for using resources and distributing goods and services within a community. • Money is a means of exchange. • Trade allows consumers to have items not made in Vermont.
=== page 12 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u105 Global Economy
u106 D2.Eco.14.K-2. Describe why people in one country trade goods and services with people in other countries.
u107 D2.Eco.15.K-2. Describe products that are produced abroad and sold domestically and products that are produced domestically and sold abroad.
u108 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u109 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u110 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to explain why people in one country trade for goods in another country.
u111 [T1 R2 C2] • States and countries have different resources. • Geography and environment connect in the production of goods and services. • Local goods and services export to Global markets (e.g., VT maple syrup). • Examples of products made in the United States (possible exports) • Examples of products bought here but made outside of the country (imports)
u112 Resources
u113 California State University - Expanding Children’s Economic World: A Curriculum Guide: This guide provides focus questions, activities, and assessments on topics such as “The Jobs People Do” and “Goods and Services.”
u114 C3 IDM - Economic Choices: This first-grade inquiry features an investigation of economic decision making through the context of how families manage their money. In examining the costs and benefits associated with making decisions about spending and saving money, students should be able to develop an argument with evidence to answer the compelling question “What choices do we make with our money?”
u115 C3 IDM - Economic Interdependence: This inquiry is an initial exploration into the concept of interdependence through the lens of community economics and the idea of a community as a diverse, mutually supportive web of needs and wants, workers and consumers, and problems and solutions. The compelling question, “What makes me become we?” challenges students to consider interdependence and groups to think about how a community is just a bunch of me- people living in a shared space but also a collective “we” that interacts, grows and contracts, and tries to solve issues. (This is a 2nd grade inquiry that can be adapted for younger students, as needed).
=== page 13 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u118 PBS Learning Media - Needs vs. Wants: In this media-rich lesson featuring a LOOP SCOOPS video, students are introduced to the concept of “needs” vs. “wants,” and begin to consider the relationship between consumer goods and happiness.
u119 Vermont Historical Society - My Sheep Farm Activity: William Jarvis (1770-1859) was a successful merchant and the United States Consul to Portugal and well known in both New England and Washington, DC. Jarvis played an important part in introducing Merino sheep to the United States, and subsequently in the development of the sheep herds in this country. The success of raising Merino herds in Vermont led to "merino mania."
=== page 14 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u122 Geography
u123 Theme: Geography’s Influence on Culture and Environment
u124 Geographic Representations
u125 D2.Geo.1.K-2. Construct maps, graphs, and other representations of familiar places.
u126 D2.Geo.2.K-2. Use maps, graphs, photographs, and other representations to describe places and the relationships and interactions that shape them.
u127 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u128 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u129 [T1 R2 C1] Students will understand how physical features and man-made structures are represented on a map.
u130 [T1 R2 C2] Map Identifications • Physical and political maps • Physical features (e.g., roads, routes, interstates) • Continents • Oceans Map Skills • Create a map as a representation of a space (e.g., playground, neighborhood, or town common). • Identify and use map key features. • Positional word use
=== page 15 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u133 Human-Environment Interaction: Place, Regions, and Culture
u134 D2.Geo.4.K-2. Explain how weather, climate, and other environmental characteristics affect people’s lives in a place or region.
u135 D2.Geo.5.K-2. Describe how human activities affect the cultural and environmental characteristics of places or regions.
u136 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u137 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u138 [T1 R2 C1] Students can explain how Vermonters are impacted by their environment and ways that individuals can support a healthy Vermont environment. Students will understand how and why environments change and how people adapt in different ways to their environments.
u139 [T1 R2 C2] • Physical environment affects the way people live and how they adapt to their physical environment (e.g., dressing for winter). • Children can take care of or hurt the environment in different ways (e.g., recycling, Green Up day, littering).
=== page 16 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u142 Human Population: Spatial Patterns and Movements
u143 D2.Geo.7.K-2. Explain why and how people, goods, and ideas move from place to place.
u144 D2.Geo.8.K-2. Compare how people in different types of communities use local and distant environments to meet their daily needs.
u145 D2.Geo.9.K-2. Describe the connections between the physical environment of a place and the economic activities found there.
u146 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u147 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u148 [T1 R2 C1] Students will understand that one’s community does not provide all of the resources that most members need in their daily lives. Students will be able to describe patterns of movement (e.g., people, goods, ideas, etc.).
u149 [T1 R2 C2] • People move for different reasons (e.g., climate, job opportunities, family connections). • Commuting/transportation • Vermont’s exports include different products. • Agricultural products include apples, maple syrup, milk, and cheese. • Forest products include wood and paper products. • Manufactured goods (#1 export) include computer/electronic products and machinery.
=== page 17 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u152 Global Interconnections: Changing Spatial Patterns
u153 D2.Geo.10.K-2. Describe changes in the physical and cultural characteristics of various world regions.
u154 D2.Geo.12.K-2. Identify ways that a catastrophic disaster may affect people living in a place.
u155 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u156 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u157 [T1 R2 C1] Students will examine and understand the varying communities that they belong to (e.g., family, school, town, etc.), and how they may change over time. Students will identify, respect, and explain the diverse cultures of their community and communities in the United States. Students will explain physical changes in their community over time.
u158 [T1 R2 C2] Culture and Community • People in communities have multiple perspectives. • Communities can be made up of diverse social and ethnic groups. • Heritage, songs, symbols, celebrations, and folklore help to build culture. • Contributions and impact of various cultural groups in the community (e.g., variety of foods and celebrations). Physical Changes to Communities • Flooding, drought, and farming impacts (e.g., runoff, erosion) • Development
=== page 18 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u161 Resources
u162 America, Our Country/Arthur: In these episodes from the PBS KIDS series ARTHUR, students examine the United States of America—the reasons it was founded, its citizens, and the symbols that represent its values.
u163 History’s Mysteries - Why Do People Move?: This four-mystery/lesson inquiry unit helps students learn about push and pull factors, refugees, and the Great Migration by exploring primary and secondary sources to answer historical questions.
u164 National Geographic - Exploring Maps and Models of Earth: Students compare miniature models to real things. Then they explore maps and globes as miniature versions of places and the Earth.
u165 National Geographic - Mapping Storybooks: Students use a map and cutouts of a story's characters to follow their actions through space and time. They retell the story in their own words, using the map and positional vocabulary.
u166 National Geographic - The Sun, Earth, and Cardinal Directions: Students record the position of the sun in the morning and afternoon and make connections to the directions east and west. They practice moving north, south, east, and west and use cardinal directions to read a map.
u167 PBS Learning Media - Animals, Maps, and Habitats, Oh My!: In this STEM activity from CYBERCHASE, students watch a video in which a habitat has been disturbed by the construction of a bike path. They then use X and Y coordinates to locate items on a map and find a solution to the problem posed in the video.
u168 PBS learning Media - Reduce, Reuse, Recycle: In this media-rich lesson featuring LOOP SCOOPS videos, students consider how the concept of "needs" vs. "wants" can help them think about ways to protect Earth's natural resources by reducing, reusing, and recycling materials.
=== page 19 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u171 History
u172 *Note: C3 indicators for Historical Sources and Evidence are woven into the Inquiry Process.
u173 Theme: Past and Present
u174 Change, Continuity, and Context
u175 D2.His.1.K-2. Create a chronological sequence of multiple events.
u176 D2.His.2.K-2. Compare life in the past to life today.
u177 D2.His.3.K-2. Generate questions about individuals and groups who have shaped a significant historical change.
=== page 20 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u180 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u181 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u182 [T1 R2 C1] Students will understand that there were significant historical individuals and events that had an impact on Vermont. Students will understand and identify the ways in which the lives of people in the past are similar to and different from people today (food, clothing, housing, jobs, education, leisure activities). Students will be able to describe similarities and differences between families long ago and families today. Students will be able to describe how documented and recorded changes over time are ways to learn about the past and wonder about the future.
u183 [T1 R2 C2] Important Vermonters: (examples include Ethan Allen, Ira Allen, Thomas Chittenden, Brigham Young, Joseph Smith, Ann Story, Annette Chase Dimcock, Lucy Terry Prince, Calvin Coolidge, Phineas Gage, Wilson “Snowflake” Bentley) How to Compare Present and Past: • People • Events • Observances • Sequential order • Folklore/Folktales • State holidays • Religious holidays and cultural recognitions Key Sequence and Chronological Terms Basic Time-related Vocabulary: • Before/After • First, next, then, last • Beginning, middle, end • Now, later • Yesterday, today, tomorrow • Past, present, future • Family history can be shared (names, family trees, letters, old photographs, etc.)
=== page 21 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u186 Perspectives
u187 D2.His.4.K-2. Compare perspectives of people in the past to those of people in the present.
u188 D2.His.6.K-2. Compare different accounts of the same historical event.
u189 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u190 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u191 [T1 R2 C1] Students will understand that children, families, and communities have similarities and differences. Students will be able to examine their own self- identity and how it fits with the identity of the family, school, and local community. Students will be able to explain that people can have different viewpoints.
u192 [T1 R2 C2] • Family histories can be recorded. • Family histories may have started in other places (states, countries, etc.). • Records of history have changed over time and with technology. • Historical sources (letters, artifacts, photographs, maps, newspapers, etc.) inform us about broad aspects of the past.
u193 Causation and Argumentation
u194 D2.His.9.K-2. Identify different kinds of historical sources.
u195 D2.His.10.K-2. Explain how historical sources can be used to study the past.
=== page 22 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u198 [T1 R1 C1] Sample C3 Indicator Connections
u199 [T1 R1 C2] Sample Content Connections
u200 [T1 R2 C1] Students will be able to explain how historical sources can be used to study the past. Students will be able to create a timeline to identify a sequence of events in a student’s life or community. Students will be able to explain ways that students can take informed action to help address issues and problems at school or in the community (See Civics - Rules, Processes, and Laws).
u201 [T1 R2 C2] • Causes/effects of life (personal/family) events can be used to study the present and the past. • Artifacts, letters, maps, photographs, newspapers, primary and secondary sources provide evidence to study the past to learn the truth about events. Community Action Examples: • School Clean-Up Day: o Action: Students pick up litter around the playground or school grounds. o Lesson: Teaches responsibility for shared spaces and environmental care. • Kindness Campaign: o Action: First graders create posters promoting kindness or perform small acts of kindness, like writing “kind notes” to classmates or teachers. o Lesson: Promotes empathy and social-emotional awareness. • Food Drive Participation: o Action: Students bring in canned goods for a local food pantry. o Lesson: Raises awareness of hunger and the importance of helping others in need. • Cards for Community Helpers/Veterans: o Action: Students make thank-you cards for firefighters, police officers, healthcare workers, or veterans. o Lesson: Encourages appreciation and connection to community roles. • Recycling Initiative: o Action: Start or help with a classroom recycling program. o Lesson: Teaches environmental responsibility and the importance of reducing waste.
=== page 23 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u204 Resources
u205 C3 IDM - Family Stories: This inquiry leads students through an investigation of their families as a way to begin understanding the concepts of past and present. By answering the compelling question “What do family stories tell us about the past?” students learn about change over time. Through the use of family artifacts (e.g., photographs, marriage licenses, family trees, keepsakes), students learn that such items can reveal information about how life in the past differs from life in the present and how their families have changed over time.
u206 KidCitizen - Capture the Flag: By investigating primary sources displaying the American flag, we will explore the various ways people use the flag to show characteristics such as pride, loyalty, and unity for the nation. In this episode, students will engage in careful observation to identify flags and note details of the variety of places in which American flags are used.
u207 KidCitizen - How have community helpers changed and stayed the same over time?: The importance of community helpers is a building block of civics understanding. In this episode, children investigate who community helpers are, and how they have changed over time through exploration of a rich photograph (from the Library of Congress) of a man delivering ice to a schoolhouse in 1899. Children explore the photograph by revealing it in sections, observing the details they find (See), and working with in-game character Ella to figure out what jobs the helpers are doing. Children collect elements of the photograph to their journal and use what they have collected to help them decide what the jobs are (Think), and then to connect those jobs with community helpers today (Wonder).
u208 KidCitizen - Rosa Parks: A Proud Daughter: In this episode, children analyze a greeting card to learn about Rosa Parks and her family. The greeting card offers a familiar resource for exploring family traditions. The front of the card has an image and some simple writing. The inside of the card has a poem, and the back of the card features Rosa Parks’ handwritten note to her mother. Children observe the details of the card and analyze clues to figure out what family tradition was being celebrated. Working with in-game mentor Ella, children use parts of the card as evidence to support their ideas as they generate hypotheses about the card’s recipient, sender, and the feelings the sender wanted to express. Children explore the handwritten note on the card and practice deciphering the message by looking for familiar letters or words.
u209 PBS Learning Media - A Qyah Juneteenth Lesson Plan - MOLLY OF DENALI: Based on the animated story “A Qyah Juneteenth” from the PBS KIDS series MOLLY OF DENALI, this lesson helps students deepen their comprehension of informational text by asking questions. In the video, Trini is excited as the Juneteenth holiday approaches, but Molly and
=== page 24 === [running header: Grade 1 – People, Places, and the Environment (Draft) (Revised: Novemb]
u212 Tooey don’t know anything about it and have many questions. They sit down with Grandma Dorena, who answers their questions about the holiday and slavery. In the lesson, students listen to informational texts, monitoring their understanding and asking questions as they arise.
u213 PBS Learning Media - Looking for Lincoln Throughout His Life: In this interdisciplinary lesson, students gather different facts about Lincoln through a variety of hands-on activities. Students will tell a story about their own lives by using classroom items. They will also create a timeline of Lincoln's life and their own.
u214 Vermont Historical Society - This Place in History: Since 2016, the Vermont Historical Society has recorded a weekly video series with a local news station. Over 200 videos highlight historic places across the state. Follow the links to access organized lists of the short videos by subject, such as “Famous Vermonters” and “Agricultural History,” or use the This Place in History Map to search for videos by location.
