=== page 1 ===
u1 Office of Teaching and Learning
u2 2022 K-12 Louisiana Student Standards for Social Studies
u3 Table of Contents
u4 Letter from Louisiana Superintendent of Education Dr. Cade Brumley . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
u5 Development of K-12 Louisiana Student Standards for Social Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
u6 Social Studies Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
u7 Reading the Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
u8 Skills and Practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
u9 Kindergarten: Life in My Home, School, and Local Community. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
u10 Grade 1: Life in the Great State of Louisiana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..12
u11 Grade 2: Life in Our Great Country: The United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
u12 Grade 3: The American Story: People, Places, and Papers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
u13 Grade 4: The Ancient World . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
u14 Grade 5: The Medieval Period to the Early Modern World . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26
u15 Grade 6: The United States and Louisiana: Beginnings Through Ratification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
u16 Grade 7: The United States and Louisiana: Early Republic Through Reconstruction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
u17 Grade 8: The United States and Louisiana: Industrial Age Through Modern Era. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
u18 High School Civics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .47
u19 High School United States History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .53
u20 High School World History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .61
u21 High School World Geography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .64
u22 Updated 7/10/2026
u23 (x=36) Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 • Baton Rouge, LA • 70804-9064 ​
=== page 2 === [running header: Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u25 Dear Educators,
u26 I proudly present to you the Louisiana Student Standards for Social Studies.
u27 These standards resulted from a year of feedback, demonstrating why an engaged, informed citizenry is essential to protecting, sustaining, and improving upon our constitutional republic. The standards reflect the totality of the events that have made America an exceptional nation.
u28 As citizens, we have a duty to educate our students in civics, economics, geography, and history. These standards accomplish that while highlighting Louisiana’s rich heritage and illuminating how the United States has become the greatest country in the history of the world.
u29 We’re blessed in Louisiana with a vibrant culture unlike any other. From our unique history to our deeply embedded traditions, our students deserve to better understand the state in which they live.
u30 The quest for freedom is a hallmark of the American story. From the signing of the Declaration of Independence, to the issuance of the Emancipation Proclamation, to the ratification of the 19th Amendment, the journey towards freedom has been one of struggle and sacrifice.
u31 We must, and we shall, teach our children the fragility of liberty.
u32 We must, and we shall, teach our students to appreciate the majesty of our country and their obligations as citizens to safeguard America’s founding principles.
u33 We must, and we shall, teach our students the triumphs of our nation and the immense magnitude of the sacrifices made by those who came before us.
u34 President Ronald Reagan said, “Freedom is one of the deepest and noblest aspirations of the human spirit.” I believe these standards create a Freedom Framework for Louisiana educators to cultivate those aspirations every single day.
u35 I look forward to seeing these standards come to life in our classrooms and, ultimately, recognizing the influence they will have on the State of Louisiana and the United States of America.
u36 Sincerely,
u37 Dr. Cade Brumley State Superintendent of Education
=== page 3 === [running header: Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u40 Development of K-12 Louisiana Student Standards for Social Studies Written and refined with input from Louisianans from across the state, the 2022 Louisiana Student Standards for Social Studies are a product of work done over a year’s time by Louisiana educators, administrators, parents, students, and internal teams at the Louisiana Department of Education (the Department).
u41 It is the Department’s vision that social studies standards should outline what students should know and be able to do to prepare them for life in our state, nation, and world. The new standards create a sequence of content that is chronologically coherent, raises expectations for elementary students, balances the acquisition of disciplinary skills and content knowledge, and better integrates the historical perspectives of people from all backgrounds.
u42 The Louisiana Student Standards for Social Studies are (1) research and evidence-based, (2) aligned with college and work expectations, (3) designed to be rigorous, and (4) organized so that content is chronologically coherent with each grade building upon the prior grade.
=== page 4 === [running header: Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u45 Social Studies Goals The Louisiana Student Standards for Social Studies were written with the goal of producing individuals who have (1) broad and deep knowledge of U.S. and world history, (2) a firm grasp and appreciation of the civic principles that underlie our system of government, (3) a solid understanding of fundamental economic principles and the ability to make wise financial decisions, and (4) proficiency in both physical and human geography. To achieve these goals, students should build content knowledge through engagement with authentic primary and secondary sources and express well-reasoned and nuanced arguments about social studies topics.
u46 The Louisiana Student Standards for Social Studies reflect the understanding that building content knowledge and the acquisition of disciplinary skills and practices are intertwined and inseparable.
u47 The Louisiana Student Standards for Social Studies establish grade-level expectations for all students. Local school systems, schools, and teachers decide how to teach the standards and ensure that every student meets these expectations.
=== page 5 === [running header: Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u50 Reading the Standards Each grade level contains a theme or topic of study expressed in its title.
u51 ●​ In kindergarten through third grade, standards are organized by core discipline (history, civics, economics, and geography). ●​ In grades four through twelve, courses are organized by topic. Standards are organized numerically.
u52 ●​ Disciplinary skills and practices are explicit and embedded in each grade level and course and should be integrated as students learn content throughout the year. ●​ Content standards are organized into clusters. Each cluster contains a framing standard followed by a list of alphabetized supporting standards. ●​ The phrases “such as,” “for example,” and “with an emphasis on” introduce examples to clarify a broad standard and are not necessarily exhaustive.
=== page 6 === [running header: Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u55 Skills and Practices  The table that follows illustrates the skills and practices related to evaluating primary and secondary sources and making claims. These skills and practices are organized into four grade bands: K-2, 3-5, 6-8, and 9-12.
=== page 7 ===
u58 [T1 R1 C1] K-2
u59 [T1 R1 C2] 3-5
u60 [T1 R1 C3] 6-8
u61 [T1 R1 C4] 9-12
u62 [T1 R2 C1] K-2.SP1. Describe the differences between primary and secondary sources.
u63 [T1 R2 C2] 3-5.SP1. Examine sources in order to: a.​ Distinguish between primary, secondary, and tertiary sources. b.​ Determine the origin, author's point of view, and intended audience. c.​ Understand and use content-specifci vocabulary and phrases.
u64 [T1 R2 C3] 6-8.SP1. Examine sources in order to: a.​ Distinguish between primary, secondary, and tertiary sources. b.​ Determine the origin, author's point of view, intended audience, and reliability. c.​ Explain the meaning of words, phrases, and content-specifci vocabulary.
u65 [T1 R2 C4] 9-12.SP1. Examine sources in order to: a.​ Distinguish between primary, secondary, and tertiary sources. b.​ Determine the origin, author's point of view, intended audience, and reliability. c.​ Analyze the meaning of words, phrases, and content-specifci vocabulary.
u66 [T1 R3 C1] K-2.SP2. Select and use appropriate evidence from primary and secondary sources to support claims.
u67 [T1 R3 C2] 3-5.SP2. Use a variety of primary and secondary sources to: a.​ Analyze social studies content. b.​ Explain claims and evidence. c.​ Compare and contrast multiple sources.
u68 [T1 R3 C3] 6-8.SP2. Use a variety of primary and secondary sources to: a.​ Analyze social studies content. b.​ Evaluate claims, counterclaims, and evidence. c.​ Compare and contrast multiple sources and accounts. d.​ Explain how the availability of sources affects historical interpretations.
u69 [T1 R3 C4] 9-12.SP2. Use a variety of primary and secondary sources to: a.​ Analyze social studies content. b.​ Evaluate claims, counterclaims, and evidence. c.​ Compare and contrast multiple sources and accounts. d.​ Explain how the availability of sources affects historical interpretations.
u70 [T1 R4 C1] K-2.SP3. Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary and/or secondary sources, content knowledge, and clear reasoning.
u71 [T1 R4 C2] 3-5.SP3. Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary and/or secondary sources, content knowledge, and clear reasoning in order to: a.​ Demonstrate an understanding of social
u72 [T1 R4 C3] 6-8.SP3. Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary and/or secondary sources, social studies content knowledge, and clear reasoning and explanations to: a.​ Demonstrate an understanding of social
u73 [T1 R4 C4] 9-12.SP3. Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary and/or secondary sources, social studies content knowledge, and clear reasoning and explanations to: a.​ Demonstrate an understanding of social
=== page 8 ===
u75 [T1 R1 C2] studies content. b.​ Compare and contrast content and viewpoints. c.​ Explain causes and effects. d.​ Describe counterclaims.
u76 [T1 R1 C3] studies content. b.​ Compare and contrast content and viewpoints. c.​ Analyze causes and effects. d.​ Evaluate counterclaims.
u77 [T1 R1 C4] studies content. b.​ Compare and contrast content and viewpoints. c.​ Analyze causes and effects. d.​ Evaluate counterclaims.
=== page 9 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u81 K-2
u82 K-2.SP1. Describe the differences between primary and secondary sources.
u83 K-2.SP2. Select and use appropriate evidence from primary and secondary sources to support
u84 claims.
u85 K-2.SP3. Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary
u86 and/or secondary sources, content knowledge, and clear reasoning.
u87 (x=36) KINDERGARTEN ​
u88 (x=180) Life in My Home, School, and Local Community
u89 Kindergarten students are introduced to the world beyond their family and home. Students will build upon experiences with their families, schools, communities, and parishes as they begin their study of the most fundamental principles and ideas of each of social studies’ core disciplines: history, civics, economics, and geography.
u90 HISTORY
u91 ●​ K.1 Order events in a chronological sequence using schedules, calendars, and timelines. For example:
u92 a.​ Daily classroom activities b.​ Significant events in students’ lives ●​ K.2 Differentiate between primary and secondary sources. For example: a.​ Primary sources: letters, diaries, autobiographies, speeches, interviews b.​ Secondary sources: magazine articles, textbooks, encyclopedia entries, biographies ●​ K.3 Select and use appropriate evidence from primary and secondary sources to support claims. ●​ K.4 Identify symbols, customs, famous individuals, and celebrations representative of our state and nation, including:
u93 a.​ Symbols: United States flag, bald eagle, Louisiana State flag, brown pelican b.​ Customs: pledging allegiance to the United States flag, singing “The Star-Spangled
u94 Banner” c.​ Individuals: George Washington, Abraham Lincoln, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. d.​ State and nationally designated holidays: New Year’s Day, the birthday of Martin Luther
u95 King, Jr., Inauguration Day, Washington’s Birthday, Mardi Gras, Memorial Day, Juneteenth, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day
=== page 10 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u100 ●​ K.5 Identify examples of different cultures and traditions in Louisiana, including: a.​ Music: Cajun, jazz, zydeco b.​ Traditions: king cake, red beans and rice on Mondays c.​ Cuisine: jambalaya, gumbo, etouffee, bread pudding, meat pies, tamales ●​ K.6 Identify a cause and effect for a significant event in a school, neighborhood, or parish.
u101 CIVICS
u102 ●​ K.7 Explain the purpose of local government. ●​ K.8 Describe the importance of fairness, responsibility, respect, and hard work. For example: a.​ Taking care of personal belongings and respecting the property of others. b.​ Following rules and recognizing the consequences of breaking rules. c.​ Taking responsibility for assigned duties. ●​ K.9 Describe organizations and individuals within a school or parish that help solve issues, including the school principal, school custodian, volunteers, police officers, and fire and rescue workers. ●​ K.10 Describe the importance of rules and how they help protect our liberties. ●​ K.11 Explain how people can work together to make decisions. ●​ K.12 Identify local business and government leaders and describe their roles.
u103 ECONOMICS
u104 ●​ K.13 Identify examples of goods and services. For example: a.​ Goods: food, toys, clothing b.​ Services: medical care, fire protection, law enforcement, library resources ●​ K.14 Describe and compare reasons to save and spend money. ●​ K.15 Differentiate between wants and needs. ●​ K.16 Identify jobs and industries within a school and community. ●​ K.17 Describe the concept of scarcity using examples.
u105 GEOGRAPHY
u106 ●​ K.18 Use maps and models to describe relative location. For example: locating objects and places to the right or left, up or down, in or out, above or below. ●​ K.19 Identify basic landforms and bodies of water in a variety of visual representations, including mountains, hills, coasts, islands, lakes, and rivers. ●​ K.20 Identify ways people interact with their environment, including: a.​ Using natural resources b.​ Modifying their environment to create shelter
=== page 11 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u111 ●​ K.21 Identify rural, suburban, and urban areas. ●​ K.22 Explain how weather impacts daily life and choices. ●​ K.23 Explain why people may move from place to place.
=== page 12 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u117 GRADE 1 ​ Life in the Great State of Louisiana
u118 The focus in grade 1 is helping students acquire knowledge regarding their place in the local community and in Louisiana. Grade 1 students will gain a deeper sense of their role as citizens in a democratic society as they develop an awareness of their basic rights and responsibilities, including the laws designed to protect them. Students will continue to develop a sense of time and place as they increase their understanding of the past, present, and future through the study of Louisiana’s rich history and culture.
u119 HISTORY
u120 ●​ 1.1 Create a chronological sequence of events using appropriate vocabulary. ●​ 1.2 Differentiate between primary and secondary sources. For example: a.​ Primary sources: letters, diaries, autobiographies, speeches, interviews b.​ Secondary sources: magazine articles, textbooks, encyclopedia entries, biographies ●​ 1.3 Select and use appropriate evidence from primary and secondary sources to support claims. ●​ 1.4 Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary and/or secondary sources, content knowledge, and clear reasoning. ●​ 1.5 Compare life in Louisiana in the past to life today. ●​ 1.6 Describe how past events can affect the present. ●​ 1.7 Compare the lives of Louisianans today in urban, suburban, and rural parishes. ●​ 1.8 Identify examples of Louisiana's culture, including: a.​ State and nationally designated holidays: New Year’s Day, the birthday of Martin Luther
u121 King, Jr., Inauguration Day, Washington’s Birthday, Mardi Gras, Memorial Day, Juneteenth, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day b.​ Music: Cajun, jazz, zydeco c.​ Languages: French, Spanish, Native languages (e.g., Atakpan, Caddo, Choctaw) d.​ Architecture: St. Louis Cathedral, The Cabildo, State Capitol, Louisiana Superdome, Strand
u122 Theater, Sports Hall of Fame, The National WWII Museum e.​ Traditions: lagniappe, second line parades, king cake, red beans and rice on Mondays f.​ Cuisine: jambalaya, gumbo, etouffee, bread pudding, meat pies, tamales g.​ Symbols: Louisiana State flag, brown pelican, magnolia tree, black bear h.​ Individuals who have made significant contributions to Louisiana’s artistic heritage. ●​ 1.9 Identify cultural groups that influenced Louisiana, including Acadians, Africans, Canary Islanders, French, Germans, Haitians, Native Americans, Asian Americans, French, and Spanish.
=== page 13 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u128 CIVICS
u129 ●​ 1.10 Describe the purpose of the state government of Louisiana. ●​ 1.11 Identify Louisiana as a unique state among the fifty, and as a part of the United States. ●​ 1.12 Identify each of the branches of the state government of Louisiana. ●​ 1.13 Describe examples of rules and laws in Louisiana. ●​ 1.14 Describe civic virtues, including voting, running for office, serving on committees, and volunteering. ●​ 1.15 Describe the importance of fairness, responsibility, respect, and hard work. For example: a.​ Taking care of personal belongings and respecting the property of others. b.​ Following rules and recognizing the consequences of breaking rules. c.​ Taking responsibility for assigned duties. ●​ 1.16 Identify leaders at various levels of Louisiana State government, and explain their roles and responsibilities.
u130 ECONOMICS
u131 ●​ 1.17 Differentiate between producers and consumers. ●​ 1.18 Identify examples of an economic cost or benefit of a decision or event. ●​ 1.19 Describe how different public and private jobs help Louisianans. For example: a.​ Public: firefighters keeping people and their property safe b.​ Private: nurses caring for sick or injured people ●​ 1.20 Explain why and how goods and services are produced and traded. ●​ 1.21 Describe how scarcity requires people to make choices. ●​ 1.22 Identify and describe which goods and services are produced in different places and regions in Louisiana. ●​ 1.23 Describe the importance of natural resources in Louisiana, including timber, seafood, and oil.
u132 GEOGRAPHY
u133 ●​ 1.24 Create and use maps or models with cardinal directions, keys, and scale. ●​ 1.25 Identify where Louisiana is within the United States and on the globe. ●​ 1.26 Differentiate between the town, parish, state, and country in which the student lives on a political map. ●​ 1.27 Identify places, regions, and landforms in Louisiana, and describe their relative locations, including the cultural regions: North Louisiana, Central Louisiana, Southwest Louisiana, Florida Parishes, Acadiana, Bayou Region, and Greater New Orleans. ●​ 1.28 Describe the physical characteristics of various regions of Louisiana, including bayous, swamps, floodplains, forests, and farmland. ●​ 1.29 Describe ways people in Louisiana change their environment to meet their needs, including the construction of bridges and levees.
=== page 14 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u139 ●​ 1.30 Explain how Louisianans have successfully met the challenges posed by natural disasters. ●​ 1.31 Explain how and why people and goods move from place to place. ●​ 1.32 Explain how the physical landscape of Louisiana affected the settlement of Native Americans and early settlers.
=== page 15 === [running header: Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u142 GRADE 2 ​ Life in Our Great Country: The United States of America
u143 The goal in grade 2 is to introduce students to major historical events, figures, and symbols related to the principles and founding of American democracy. Grade 2 students will learn to value differences among people and exemplify a respect for the rights and opinions of others. Students will also develop an appreciation of shared values, principles, and beliefs that promote stability for our country’s government and its citizens while building knowledge about our founding documents, system of government, and individuals who exemplify American values and principles.
u144 HISTORY
u145 ●​ 2.1 Create and use a chronological sequence of events using appropriate vocabulary. ●​ 2.2 Differentiate between primary and secondary sources. For example: a.​ Primary sources: letters, diaries, autobiographies, speeches, interviews b.​ Secondary sources: magazine articles, textbooks, encyclopedia entries, biographies ●​ 2.3 Select and use appropriate evidence from primary and secondary sources to support claims. ●​ 2.4 Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary and secondary sources with clear reasoning. ●​ 2.5 Compare life in the United States in the past to life today. ●​ 2.6 Describe the significance of the American Revolution and the founding of the United States. ●​ 2.7 Identify and describe national historical figures, celebrations, symbols, and places. a.​ Identify and describe the Founding Fathers, including George Washington, Thomas
u146 Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, Patrick Henry, John Adams, John Hancock, and James Madison. b.​ Identify and describe historical female figures, including Abigail Adams, Anne Hutchinson,
u147 Dolley Madison, Betsy Ross, and Phillis Wheatley. c.​ Describe the significance of state and nationally designated holidays, including New Year’s
u148 Day, the birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., Inauguration Day, Washington’s Birthday, Mardi Gras, Memorial Day, Juneteenth, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. d.​ Describe the history of American symbols, including the Liberty Bell, United States flag
u149 (etiquette, customs pertaining to the display and use of the flag), bald eagle, national anthem, Uncle Sam, Statue of Liberty, The Pledge of Allegiance, and the national motto “In God We Trust.” e.​ Identify and describe man-made American monuments and landmarks, including the
u150 Gateway Arch, the Golden Gate Bridge, Jefferson Memorial, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial in Washington, D.C, Lincoln Memorial, Mount Rushmore, Pearl Harbor Museum, September 11 Memorial and Museum, Statue of Liberty, the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, U.S. Capitol, Washington Monument, and the White House.
=== page 16 === [running header: Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u153 f.​ Identify and describe natural American landmarks, including the Grand Canyon, the
u154 Mississippi River, Monument Valley, Niagara Falls, the Rocky Mountains, the Smoky Mountains, and Yellowstone National Park. ●​ 2.8 Interpret legends, stories, and songs that contributed to the development of the cultural history of the United States, including Native American legends, African American history, tall tales, and stories of folk heroes.
u155 CIVICS
u156 ●​ 2.9 Describe the structure and responsibilities of each of the three branches of the U.S. government (legislative, executive, judicial). ●​ 2.10 Identify and describe principles of American democracy and relate them to the founding of the nation.
u157 a.​ Identify reasons for the settlement of the thirteen colonies and the founding of the United
u158 States, including the search for freedom and a new life. b.​ Identify and describe basic principles of the Declaration of Independence and the
u159 Constitution of the United States, including equality under the law and fair treatment for all. ●​ 2.11 Explain the purpose of rules and laws in the United States. ●​ 2.12 Define governmental systems, including democracy and monarchy. ●​ 2.13 Describe civic virtues, including voting, running for office, serving on committees, and volunteering. ●​ 2.14 Describe how hard work, good habits, consistent attendance in school, and planning for the future can help you achieve your goals, including attending college, learning a trade, and having a successful career. ●​ 2.15 Compare local, state, and national elected officials and explain their roles and responsibilities, including the president, governor, mayor, and representatives.
u160 ECONOMICS
u161 ●​ 2.16 Describe the United States in economic terms, including free enterprise, private property, producers and consumers, profit and loss, costs and benefits, and imports and exports.
u162 a.​ Describe how people are both producers and consumers. b.​ Explain why free enterprise and private property are important concepts and how they are
u163 beneficial to individuals and to the United States. c.​ Identify examples of an economic cost or benefit of a decision or event. ●​ 2.17 Explain why and how people specialize in the production of goods and services. ●​ 2.18 Explain how scarcity of resources and opportunity costs require people to make choices to satisfy wants and needs. ●​ 2.19 Identify how people use natural (renewable and non-renewable), human, and capital resources to provide goods and services.
=== page 17 === [running header: Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u166 GEOGRAPHY
u167 ●​ 2.20 Create and use maps and models with a key, scale, and compass with intermediate directions. ●​ 2.21 Describe geographic features and physical characteristics of places in the United States and the world, including mountains, hills, plains, deserts, coasts, islands, peninsulas, lakes, oceans, and rivers. ●​ 2.22 Identify and locate the four hemispheres, Equator, and Prime Meridian. ●​ 2.23 Describe the relative location of the United States. ●​ 2.24 Compare and contrast basic land use and economic activities in urban, suburban, and rural environments. ●​ 2.25 Identify natural disasters such as blizzards, earthquakes, tornadoes, hurricanes, and floods, and explain their effects on people and the environment. ●​ 2.26 Explain how and why people, goods, and ideas move from place to place. ●​ 2.27 Describe how and why people from various cultures immigrate to the United States.
=== page 18 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u172 [T1 R1 C1] 3-5
u173 [T1 R2 C1] 3-5.SP1.
u174 [T1 R2 C2] Examine sources in order to: A.​ Distinguish between primary, secondary, and tertiary sources. B.​ Determine the origin, author's point of view, and intended audience. C.​ Understand and use content-specifci vocabulary and phrases.
u175 [T1 R3 C1] 3-5.SP2.
u176 [T1 R3 C2] Select and use appropriate evidence from primary and secondary sources to support claims: A.​ Analyze social studies content. B.​ Explain claims and evidence. C.​ Compare and contrast multiple sources, and distinguish between primary, secondary, and tertiary sources.
u177 [T1 R4 C1] 3-5.SP3.
u178 [T1 R4 C2] Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary and/or secondary sources, content knowledge, and clear reasoning in order to: A.​ Demonstrate an understanding of social studies content. B.​ Compare and contrast content and viewpoints. C.​ Explain causes and effects. D.​ Describe counterclaims.
u179 GRADE 3 ​ The American Story: People, Places, and Papers
u180 Building on what students learned in grade 2 about our founding documents and system of government, this course continues to introduce students to major historical events, figures, symbols, and places related to the development and history of the United States of America. In grade 3, students examine the people, places, and papers in United States history that exemplify American ideals and fundamental values such as equality under the law, liberty, justice, and responsibility for the common good. Students will also focus on building their geographic knowledge of North America and the wider world, while further developing an understanding of how the environment affects its inhabitants.
u181 HISTORY
u182 ●​ 3.1 Create and use a chronological sequence of related events to compare developments and describe instances of change and continuity. ●​ 3.2 Explain connections between ideas, events, and developments in U.S. history. ●​ 3.3 Use a variety of primary and secondary sources to: a.​ Analyze social studies content. b.​ Explain claims and evidence. c.​ Compare and contrast multiple sources.
=== page 19 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u187 ●​ 3.4 Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary and/or secondary sources, content knowledge, and clear reasoning in order to:
u188 a.​ Demonstrate an understanding of social studies content. b.​ Compare and contrast content and viewpoints. c.​ Explain causes and effects. d.​ Describe counterclaims. ●​ 3.5 Compare life in the United States in the past and present. ●​ 3.6 Identify and describe national historical figures, celebrations, and symbols. a.​ Describe the achievements of George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Lewis and Clark,
u189 Sacagawea, Abraham Lincoln, Frederick Douglass, Harriet Tubman, Sojourner Truth, Sitting Bull, George Washington Carver, Susan B. Anthony, Mabel Ping-Hua Lee, Theodore Roosevelt, the Wright Brothers, Thomas Edison, Henry Ford, Alexander Graham Bell, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Jackie Robinson, Sally Ride, Katherine Johnson, and Mae Jemison. b.​ Describe the significance of state and nationally designated holidays, including New Year’s
u190 Day, the birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., Inauguration Day, Washington’s Birthday, Mardi Gras, Memorial Day, Juneteenth, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. c.​ Describe the history of American symbols, including the Liberty Bell, U.S. flag (etiquette,
u191 customs pertaining to the display and use of the flag), bald eagle, national anthem, Uncle Sam, Statue of Liberty, The Pledge of Allegiance, and the national motto “In God We Trust.” d.​ Identify and describe man-made American monuments and landmarks, including the
u192 Gateway Arch, the Golden Gate Bridge, Jefferson Memorial, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial in Washington, D.C, Lincoln Memorial, Mount Rushmore, Pearl Harbor Museum, September 11 Memorial and Museum, Statue of Liberty, the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, U.S. Capitol, Washington Monument, and the White House. e.​ Identify and describe natural American landmarks, including the Grand Canyon, the
u193 Mississippi River, Monument Valley, Niagara Falls, the Rocky Mountains, the Smoky Mountains, and Yellowstone National Park. ●​ 3.7 Describe the significance of major events in the history of the United States, including the American Revolution, the Louisiana Purchase, the Lewis and Clark Expedition, the abolition of slavery following the Civil War, the women’s suffrage movement, the Civil Rights Movement, and the Space Race. ●​ 3.8 Describe how voluntary and involuntary migration have affected the United States. ●​ 3.9 Describe how technological advancements such as the steam engine, railroad, airplane, automobile, electricity, telephone, radio, television, microwave, and digital technologies have affected the lives of people in the United States.
=== page 20 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u198 CIVICS
u199 ●​ 3.10 Recognize functions of the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States.
u200 a.​ Describe the process by which a bill becomes law. b.​ Describe the responsibilities of the three branches of government. c.​ Explain the relationship between the federal government and the state government. d.​ Compare and contrast representative democracy (republic) and monarchy. e.​ Explain how our founding documents protect individuals’ rights to life, liberty, and the
u201 pursuit of happiness. ●​ 3.11 Identify and describe basic principles of the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States. ●​ 3.12 Explain the significance of the Emancipation Proclamation and the Thirteenth Amendment. ●​ 3.13 Describe civic virtues: voting, running for office, serving on committees, and volunteering. ●​ 3.14 Describe how and why people become citizens of the United States.
u202 ECONOMICS
u203 ●​ 3.15 Describe the United States in economic terms: free enterprise, private property, producers and consumers, profit and loss, supply and demand, and imports and exports.
u204 a.​ Explain why free enterprise and private property are important concepts and how they are
u205 beneficial to individuals and to the United States. b.​ Explain how the interaction between producers and consumers in a free market satisfies
u206 economic wants and needs. c.​ Explain how supply and demand can affect the prices of goods and services. d.​ Differentiate between imports and exports. e.​ Explain why and how people specialize in the production of goods and services. ●​ 3.16 Identify how people use natural (renewable and non-renewable), human, and capital resources to provide goods and services. ●​ 3.17 Describe the relationship between scarcity and opportunity cost in economic decision-making. ●​ 3.18 Describe the importance of personal financial decision-making, such as budgeting and saving.
u207 GEOGRAPHY
u208 ●​ 3.19 Create and use maps and models with a key, scale, and compass with intermediate directions. ●​ 3.20 Describe the geographic features of places in the United States. ●​ 3.21 Interpret geographic features of the United States using a variety of tools, such as different types of maps and photos. ●​ 3.22 Identify and locate the four hemispheres, Equator, and Prime Meridian. ●​ 3.23 Locate and describe the seven continents and five oceans.
=== page 21 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u213 ●​ 3.24 Describe the relative location of the United States. ●​ 3.25 Describe why and how people in the United States have modified their environment. ●​ 3.26 Compare and contrast basic land use and economic activities in urban, suburban, and rural environments. ●​ 3.27 Describe the importance of conservation and preservation. ●​ 3.28 Describe how the regions of the United States vary culturally and economically.
=== page 22 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u219 GRADE 4 ​ The Ancient World
u220 After building knowledge in grades K-3 about their community, parish, state, and nation, students are ready to expand their historical horizons and begin an exploration of the ancient and classical world. In grade 4, students are introduced to the story of human civilization and will examine key characteristics of society, government, and culture in the ancient Near East, Northern Africa, India, Greece, Rome, China, and the Americas.
u221 ●​ 4.1 Create and use a chronological sequence of related events to compare developments and describe instances of change and continuity. ●​ 4.2 Use a variety of primary and secondary sources to: a.​ Analyze social studies content. b.​ Explain claims and evidence. c.​ Compare and contrast multiple sources. ●​ 4.3 Explain connections between ideas, events, and developments in world history. ●​ 4.4 Compare and contrast events and developments in world history. ●​ 4.5 Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary and/or secondary sources, content knowledge, and clear reasoning in order to:
u222 a.​ Demonstrate an understanding of social studies content. b.​ Compare and contrast content and viewpoints. c.​ Explain causes and effects. d.​ Describe counterclaims. ●​ 4.6 Create and use geographic representations to locate and describe places and geographic characteristics, including hemispheres; landforms such as continents, oceans, rivers, mountains, and deserts; cardinal and intermediate directions; climate and environment. ●​ 4.7 Use geographic representations and historical information to explain how physical geography influenced the development of ancient civilizations and empires. ●​ 4.8 Describe the origin and spread of major world religions as they developed throughout history. ●​ 4.9 Describe the characteristics of nomadic hunter-gatherer societies, including their use of hunting weapons, fire, shelter, and tools. ●​ 4.10 Describe early human migration out of Africa, first to Asia and Europe, then to Australia and the Americas. ●​ 4.11 Explain the effects of the Agricultural Revolution, including the barter economy, food surpluses, domestication of plants and animals, specialization, and the growth of permanent settlements. ●​ 4.12 Identify and explain the importance of the following key characteristics of civilizations: culture, specialization, infrastructure, stable food supply, government, technology, belief systems, writing, and social structure.
=== page 23 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u228 ●​ 4.13 Describe the geographic, political, economic, and cultural structures of the ancient Near East. a.​ Identify and locate geographic features of the ancient Near East, including the Black Sea,
u229 Persian Gulf, Euphrates River, Tigris River, Mediterranean Sea, and Zagros Mountains. b.​ Explain how geographic and climatic features led to the region being known as the Fertile
u230 Crescent. c.​ Explain how irrigation, silt, metallurgy, production of tools, use of animals, and inventions,
u231 such as the wheel and plow, led to advancements in agriculture. d.​ Describe how changes in agriculture in Sumer led to economic growth, expansion of trade
u232 and transportation, and the growth of independent city-states. e.​ Identify important achievements of the Mesopotamian civilization, including cuneiform, clay
u233 tablets, ziggurats, and the Epic of Gilgamesh as the oldest written epic. f.​ Describe the significance of the written law in the Code of Hammurabi, and explain the
u234 meaning of the phrase “an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.” g.​ Describe the achievements of the ancient Israelites. ●​ 4.14 Describe the geographic, political, economic, and cultural structures of ancient Egypt. a.​ Identify and locate geographic features of ancient Egypt, including the Mediterranean Sea,
u235 Red Sea, Nile River, and Delta, and the Sahara Desert. b.​ Explain the structure of ancient Egyptian society, including the relationships between
u236 groups of people and the role played by the pharaoh and enslaved people. c.​ Explain Egyptian beliefs about the afterlife, the reasons for mummification, and the use of
u237 pyramids. d.​ Describe the significance of key figures from ancient Egypt, including Queen Hatshepsut
u238 and Ramses the Great, and the significance of the discovery of Tutankhamun’s tomb on the modern understanding of ancient Egypt. e.​ Describe the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization, including hieroglyphics,
u239 papyrus, and the pyramids and Sphinx at Giza. f.​ Describe the cultural diffusion of ancient Egypt with surrounding civilizations through trade
u240 and conflict. ●​ 4.15 Describe the geographic, political, economic, and cultural structures of ancient India. a.​ Identify and locate geographic features of ancient India, including the Ganges River, Indus
u241 River, Himalayan Mountains, Indian Ocean, and the subcontinent of India. b.​ Explain the emergence of civilization in the Indus River Valley as an early agricultural
u242 civilization and describe its achievements, including architecture built with bricks, roads arranged into a series of grid systems, and sewer systems. c.​ Identify the long-lasting intellectual traditions that emerged during the late empire of
u243 ancient India, including advances in medicine and Hindu-Arabic numerals. ●​ 4.16 Describe the geographic, political, economic, and cultural structures of ancient Greece. a.​ Identify and locate geographic features of ancient Greece, including the Mediterranean
u244 Sea, Athens, the Peloponnesian peninsula, and Sparta.
=== page 24 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u250 b.​ Describe how the geographic features of ancient Greece, including its mountainous terrain
u251 and access to the Mediterranean Sea, contributed to its organization into city-states and the development of maritime trade. c.​ Describe the concept of the polis in Greek city-states, including the ideas of citizenship,
u252 civic participation, and the rule of law. d.​ Explain the basic concepts of direct democracy and oligarchy. e.​ Explain the characteristics of the major Greek city-states of Athens and Sparta, including
u253 the status of women, approaches to education, type of government, and the practice of slavery. f.​ Describe the causes and consequences of the Persian Wars, including the role of Athens
u254 and its cooperation with Sparta. g.​ Describe the polytheistic religion of ancient Greece. h.​ Identify Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle as great philosophers of ancient Greece and explain
u255 how ideas can spread through writing and teaching. i.​ Identify examples of ancient Greek architecture, including the Parthenon and the Acropolis. j.​ Identify Alexander the Great and explain how his conquests spread Hellenistic (Greek) culture. ●​ 4.17 Describe the geographic, political, economic, and cultural structures of ancient Rome. a.​ Identify and locate the geographic features of ancient Rome, including the Mediterranean
u256 Sea, the Italian Alps, Rome, the Italian Peninsula, and the Tiber River. b.​ Explain how the geographic location of ancient Rome contributed to its political and
u257 economic growth in the Mediterranean region and beyond. c.​ Describe the class system of ancient Rome, including the roles and rights of patricians,
u258 plebeians, and enslaved people in Roman society. d.​ Describe the polytheistic religion of ancient Rome and its connection to ancient Greek
u259 beliefs. e.​ Describe the characteristics of Julius Caesar’s rule, including his role as dictator for life. f.​ Explain the influence of Augustus Caesar, including the establishment of the Roman Empire
u260 and its expansion during the Pax Romana. g.​ Describe how innovations in engineering and architecture contributed to Roman expansion,
u261 including the role of: aqueducts, domes, arches, roads, bridges, and sanitation. h.​ Describe the fall of the Western Roman Empire, including difficulty governing its large
u262 territory and political, military, and economic problems. ●​ 4.18 Describe the geographic, political, economic, and cultural structures of ancient China. a.​ Identify and locate geographic features of ancient China, including the Gobi Desert, Plateau
u263 of Tibet, Himalayan Mountains, Yangtze River, Pacific Ocean, and the Yellow River. b.​ Describe the influence of geographic features on the origins of ancient Chinese civilization
u264 in the Yellow River Valley, and explain how China’s geography helped create a unique cultural identity.
=== page 25 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u270 c.​ Describe problems prevalent in the time of Confucius and explain the concepts of filial piety
u271 (dutiful respect) and the Mandate of Heaven. d.​ Explain the significance of the unification of ancient China into the first Chinese empire by
u272 Qin Shi Huangdi. e.​ Describe how the size of ancient China made governing difficult and how early dynasties
u273 attempted to solve this problem, including the construction of the Grand Canal and the Great Wall. f.​ Explain the major accomplishments of the Han Dynasty, including the magnetic compass,
u274 papermaking, porcelain, silk, and woodblock printing. g.​ Describe how the desire for Chinese goods influenced the creation of the Silk Road and
u275 began a process of cultural diffusion throughout Eurasia. ●​ 4.19 Describe the geographic, political, economic, and cultural structures of Indigenous civilizations of the Americas.
u276 a.​ Identify and locate geographic features in the Americas, including the Mississippi River and
u277 Delta, Amazon River, the Pacific Ocean, Appalachian Mountains, Gulf of America, Atlantic Ocean, South America, and the Yucatán Peninsula. b.​ Describe the cultural elements among Indigenous communities in the Americas, including
u278 housing, clothing, games/entertainment, dance, and how food was gathered/caught and cooked. c.​ Explain how nomadic groups of people first hunted and traveled throughout what would
u279 become Louisiana. d.​ Explain how people living in what would become Louisiana gradually moved towards
u280 seasonal hunting and gathering, using new tools and practices for hunting, and building large mounds for ceremonial and practical purposes. e.​ Describe key characteristics of Poverty Point culture, including art, hunting methods, dress,
u281 food, use of mounds, and resources traded there. f.​ Explain the major accomplishments of the Mayans, including advancements in astronomy,
u282 mathematics, and the calendar, the construction of pyramids, temples, and hieroglyphic writing. g.​ Describe the influence of geographic features on the origins of the Mayan civilization and
u283 explain theories related to the abandonment of their cities.
=== page 26 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u289 GRADE 5 ​ The Medieval Period to the Early Modern World
u290 Grade 5 builds on what students learned about ancient and classical civilizations in grade 4. In this course, students will examine Medieval Europe and Africa, Aztec and Incan civilizations, the Renaissance and Reformation, the Age of Exploration, and the European conquest and colonization of the Americas. Students will also examine the growth in economic interactions among civilizations as well as the exchange of ideas, beliefs, technologies, and commodities.
u291 ●​ 5.1 Create and use a chronological sequence of related events to compare developments and describe instances of change and continuity. ●​ 5.2 Use a variety of primary and secondary sources to: a.​ Analyze social studies content. b.​ Explain claims and evidence. c.​ Compare and contrast multiple sources. ●​ 5.3 Explain connections between ideas, events, and developments in world history. ●​ 5.4 Compare and contrast events and developments in world history. ●​ 5.5 Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary and/or secondary sources, content knowledge, and clear reasoning in order to:
u292 a.​ Demonstrate an understanding of social studies content. b.​ Compare and contrast content and viewpoints. c.​ Explain causes and effects. d.​ Describe counterclaims. ●​ 5.6 Create and use geographic representations to locate and describe places and geographic
u293 [T1 R1 C2] characteristics, including hemispheres; landforms such as continents, oceans, rivers, mountains,
u294 [T1 R2 C2] deserts; cardinal and intermediate directions; latitude and longitude, climate, and environment.
u295 [T1 R3 C1] ●​
u296 [T1 R3 C2] 5.7
u297 [T1 R3 C3] Use geographic representations and historical information to explain how physical geography
u298 [T1 R4 C2] infulenced the development of civilizations and empires.
u299 ●​ 5.8 Describe the origin and spread of major world religions as they developed throughout history. ●​ 5.9 Describe the geographic, political, economic, and cultural structures of Europe during the Middle Ages.
u300 a.​ Identify and locate geographic features of Europe, including the Alps, Atlantic Ocean, North
u301 European Plain, English Channel, Ural Mountains, and the Mediterranean Sea. b.​ Describe the role of monasteries in the preservation of knowledge and the spread of the
u302 Catholic Church throughout Europe. c.​ Explain how Charlemagne shaped and defined medieval Europe, including the creation of
u303 the Holy Roman Empire, and the establishment of Christianity as the religion of the Empire. d.​ Describe the development of feudalism and manorialism and their role in the medieval
u304 European economy.
=== page 27 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u310 e.​ Describe the significance of the Magna Carta, including limiting the power of the monarch,
u311 the rule of law, and the right to trial by jury. f.​ Explain how the Crusades affected Christian, Muslim, and Jewish populations in Europe. g.​ Describe the economic and social effects of the spread of the Black Death (Bubonic Plague)
u312 from Central Asia to China, the Middle East, and Europe, and its effect on the global population. h.​ Describe the significance of the Hundred Years’ War, including the roles of Henry V in
u313 shaping English culture and language and Joan of Arc in promoting a peaceful end to the war. ●​ 5.10 Describe the geographic, political, economic, and cultural structures of Southwest Asia and North Africa.
u314 a.​ Identify and locate the geographic features of Southwest Asia and North Africa, including
u315 the Arabian Peninsula, the Persian Gulf, the Arabian Sea, the Red Sea, Black Sea, and the Caspian Sea. b.​ Describe the diffusion of Islam, its culture, and the Arabic language throughout North Africa
u316 and Southwest Asia. c.​ Summarize the contributions of Islamic scholars in the areas of art, medicine, science, and
u317 mathematics. ●​ 5.11 Describe the geographic, political, economic, and cultural structures of Medieval West African Kingdoms.
u318 a.​ Identify and locate the geographic features of West Africa, including the Atlantic Ocean,
u319 Niger River, Djenne, the Sahara, Gulf of Guinea, and Timbuktu. b.​ Describe the growth of the kingdoms of Ghana, Mali, and Songhai, including cities such as
u320 Djenne and Timbuktu as centers of trade, culture, and learning. c.​ Describe the role of the Trans-Saharan caravan trade in the changing religious and cultural
u321 characteristics of West Africa and in the exchange of salt, gold, and enslaved people. d.​ Explain the importance of the Malian king Mansa Musa and his pilgrimage to Mecca. ●​ 5.12 Describe the origins, accomplishments, and geographic diffusion of the Renaissance as well as the historical developments of the Protestant Reformation and Scientific Revolution.
u322 a.​ Explain how the location of the Italian Peninsula affected the movement of resources,
u323 knowledge, and culture throughout Italy’s independent trade cities. b.​ Identify the importance of Florence, Italy, and the Medici Family in the early stages of the
u324 Renaissance. c.​ Explain the development of Renaissance art, including the significance of Leonardo da
u325 Vinci, Michelangelo, William Shakespeare, and systems of patronage. d.​ Explain how Johannes Gutenberg’s printing press affected the growth of literacy and the
u326 diffusion of knowledge. e.​ Explain the significant causes of the Protestant Reformation, including the selling of
u327 indulgences and Martin Luther’s 95 Theses.
=== page 28 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u333 f.​ Compare and contrast the heliocentric and geocentric theories of the Greeks (geocentric)
u334 and Copernicus (heliocentric). g.​ Describe Galileo Galilei’s theories and the improvement of scientific tools, including the
u335 telescope and microscope. ●​ 5.13 Describe the geographic, political, economic, and cultural structures of Indigenous civilizations of the Americas.
u336 a.​ Identify and locate the geographic features of the Americas, including the Andes
u337 Mountains, Appalachian Mountains, Great Plains, Pacific Ocean Mountains, Gulf of America, Rocky Mountains, Atlantic Ocean, Mississippi River, Amazon River, South America, Caribbean Sea, North America, Yucatan Peninsula, and the Central Mexican Plateau. b.​ Explain the effects of geographic features on Indigenous North American cultures
u338 (Northeast, Southeast, and Plains), including clothing, housing, and agriculture. c.​ Describe the existence of diverse networks of Indigenous North American cultures,
u339 including varied languages, customs, and economic and political structures. d.​ Explain the effects of geographic features and climate on the agricultural practices and
u340 settlement of the Aztec and Incan civilizations. e.​ Explain how the Aztecs built and controlled a powerful empire that covered much of what is
u341 now central Mexico. f.​ Describe Aztec religious beliefs and how they were linked to the traditions of the society. g.​ Describe Tenochtitlán and the surrounding landscape, including aqueducts, massive
u342 temples, and chinampa agriculture. h.​ Identify Moctezuma II and describe features of his reign. i.​ Explain how the Inca built and organized their empire and how Inca engineers overcame challenges presented by the geography of the land. j.​ Explain how the Incas kept their empire together without a written language. ●​ 5.14 Analyze the motivations for the movement of people from Europe to the Americas and describe the effects of exploration by Europeans.
u343 a.​ Analyze why European countries were motivated to explore the world, including religion,
u344 political rivalry, and economic gain. b.​ Identify the significance of the voyages and routes of discovery of the following explorers
u345 by their sponsoring country: England: Henry Hudson; France: Jacques Cartier; Portugal: Vasco da Gama, Bartolomeu Dias; Spain: Christopher Columbus, Hernando de Soto, Ferdinand Magellan, and Amerigo Vespucci. c.​ Describe Prince Henry the Navigator’s influence on exploration, voyages, cartographic
u346 improvements, and tools related to exploration, including the compass, caravel, and astrolabe. d.​ Describe how the Aztec and Inca empires were eventually defeated by Spanish
u347 conquistadors.
=== page 29 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u353 e.​ Explain the impact of the Columbian Exchange on people, plants, animals, technology,
u354 culture, ideas, and diseases among Europe, Africa, Asia, and the Americas in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and examine the major effects on each continent. f.​ Explain how Spanish colonization introduced Christianity, the mission system, and the
u355 encomienda system to the Americas, as well as the transition to African slavery. g.​ Describe the development of the transatlantic slave trade and the experiences of enslaved
u356 people in the Americas.
=== page 30 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u362 [T1 R1 C1] 6-8
u363 [T1 R2 C1] 6-8.SP1.
u364 [T1 R2 C2] Examine sources in order to: A.​ Distinguish between primary, secondary, and tertiary sources. B.​ Determine the origin, author's point of view, intended audience, and reliability. C.​ Explain the meaning of words, phrases, and content-specifci vocabulary.
u365 [T1 R3 C1] 6-8.SP2.
u366 [T1 R3 C2] Use a variety of primary and secondary sources to: A.​ Analyze social studies content. B.​ Evaluate claims, counterclaims, and evidence. C.​ Compare and contrast multiple sources and accounts. D.​ Explain how the availability of sources affects historical interpretations.
u367 [T1 R4 C1] 6-8.SP3.
u368 [T1 R4 C2] Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary and/or secondary sources, social studies content knowledge, and clear reasoning and explanations to: A.​ Demonstrate an understanding of social studies content. B.​ Compare and contrast content and viewpoints. C.​ Analyze causes and effects. D.​ Evaluate counterclaims.
u369 [T2 R1 C1] GRADE 6
u370 [T2 R1 C2] ​ The United States and Louisiana: Beginnings Through Ratifci ation
u371 Beginning with the exploration of colonization of North America, this course offers a chronological study of major events, issues, movements, individuals, and groups of people in the United States from a national and a Louisiana perspective. In this course, students will examine British and French exploration and colonization, the development of the British thirteen colonies, French and Spanish Colonial Louisiana, the American Revolution, and the development and ratification of the U.S. Constitution.
u372 ●​ 6.1 Explain ideas, events, and developments in the history of the United States of America from 1580 to 1791 and how they progressed, changed, or remained the same over time. ●​ 6.2 Analyze connections between ideas, events, and developments in U.S. history within their global context from 1580 to 1791. ●​ 6.3 Compare and contrast events and developments in U.S. history from 1580 to 1791. ●​ 6.4 Use geographic representations and historical data to analyze events and developments in U.S. history from 1580 to 1791, including environmental, cultural, economic, and political characteristics and changes. ●​ 6.5 Use maps to identify absolute location (latitude and longitude) and describe geographic characteristics of places in Louisiana, North America, and the world.
=== page 31 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u378 ●​ 6.6 Use a variety of primary and secondary sources to: a.​ Analyze social studies content. b.​ Evaluate claims, counterclaims, and evidence. c.​ Compare and contrast multiple sources and accounts. d.​ Explain how the availability of sources affects historical interpretations. ●​ 6.7 Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary and/or secondary sources, social studies content knowledge, and clear reasoning and explanations to:
u379 a.​ Demonstrate an understanding of social studies content. b.​ Compare and contrast content and viewpoints. c.​ Analyze causes and effects. d.​ Evaluate counterclaims. ●​ 6.8 Analyze European exploration and colonization of North America. a.​ Explain the significance of the land claims made in North America by European powers
u380 after 1600, including England, France, the Netherlands, Portugal, Russia, Spain, and Sweden, and their effects on Native Americans. b.​ Compare and contrast the motivations, challenges, and achievements related to the
u381 exploration and settlement of North America by the British, Dutch, French, and Spanish, including the search for wealth, freedom, and a new life. ●​ 6.9 Analyze the development of the settlements and colonies in the late sixteenth century through the seventeenth century.
u382 a.​ Explain the importance of the founding and development of Jamestown, including
u383 representative government established through the House of Burgesses, private ownership of land, the introduction of slavery, and the arrival of women and families. b.​ Explain the importance of the founding and development of the Plymouth settlement,
u384 including the practice of self-government established by the Mayflower Compact, religious freedom, and contributions of Native Americans, including Chief Massasoit and Squanto, and the leadership of William Bradford. c.​ Compare and contrast the New England, Middle, and Southern colonies, including their
u385 physical geography, religion, education, economy, and government. d.​ Explain the contributions of key individuals and groups to the foundation of the colonies,
u386 including Pilgrims, Puritans, Quakers, John Smith, Roger Williams, Anne Hutchinson, William Penn, Edward Winslow, William Bradford, John Winthrop, John Rolfe, and Pocahontas. e.​ Identify the locations of the colonies and lands inhabited by Native Americans, and explain
u387 how location, environment, and resources affected changes and development over time. f.​ Analyze the causes, interactions, and consequences related to triangular trade, including
u388 the forced migration of Africans through the transatlantic trade of enslaved people and the experiences of the Middle Passage. g.​ Explain the experiences and perspectives of various people groups living in colonial North
u389 America, including large landowners, farmers, artisans, women, children, indentured servants, enslaved people, and Native Americans.
=== page 32 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u395 h.​ Analyze cooperation, competition, and conflict among groups in North America from the
u396 late 1500s to the mid-1700s, including the Dutch, English, French, Spanish, and Native Americans, including the 1621 Autumn Harvest Celebration, the French and Native American trade of fur, Bacon’s Rebellion, and King Philip’s (Metacom) War. ●​ 6.10 Analyze the growth and development of colonial Louisiana. a.​ Explain the significance of events that influenced pre-colonial and colonial Louisiana,
u397 including the founding of Natchitoches and New Orleans, the Treaty of Fontainebleau, and the Third Treaty of San Ildefonso. b.​ Describe the factors that influenced migration within and to Louisiana by various groups,
u398 including French, Spanish, Africans, Acadians, Germans, Canary Islanders/Islenos, and Haitians, and explain how individuals and groups interacted and contributed to the development of Louisiana. c.​ Describe the characteristics of colonial Louisiana, including physical geography, climate,
u399 economic activities, culture and customs, and government, and analyze their importance to the growth and development of Louisiana. d.​ Explain the influence of France and Spain on government in Louisiana, with an emphasis on
u400 the Napoleonic Code, the Code Noir, and the contributions of Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville, John Law, King Louis XIV, and Alejandro O’Reilly. e.​ Describe the contributions and achievements of Gens de Couleur Libres in colonial
u401 Louisiana. f.​ Compare and contrast French and Spanish colonial Louisiana and colonial Louisiana and
u402 British colonies. ●​ 6.11 Analyze the causes, course, and consequences of the American Revolution. a.​ Analyze the historical and religious factors that influenced the development of government
u403 in the United States, including those from ancient Greece; the Roman Republic; the Judeo-Christian tradition; English rule of law and the Magna Carta; Enlightenment philosophies; and the Great Awakening. b.​ Explain the causes and effects of the French and Indian War. c.​ Analyze the role and importance of key events and developments leading to the American
u404 Revolution, including end of salutary neglect by King George III, French and Indian War, Proclamation of 1763, Acts of 1764–1773 (Sugar Act, Stamp Act, Quartering Act, Townshend Acts, Tea Act), Boston Massacre and the death of Crispus Attucks, Boston Tea Party, Coercive (Intolerable) Acts, First Continental Congress, Restraining Acts, the seizure of firearms, and Second Continental Congress. d.​ Explain how key ideas expressed in historical works influenced the American Revolution,
u405 including “taxation without representation is tyranny” (James Otis), John Dickinson’s Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania, Patrick Henry’s “Give Me Liberty or Give Me Death” speech, Thomas Paine’s Common Sense, and the Declaration of Independence: “all men are created equal, … endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, … among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness,” and “the consent of the governed.”
=== page 33 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u411 e.​ Explain efforts to mobilize support for the American Revolution by individuals and groups,
u412 including the Minutemen, Committees of Correspondence, and Sons of Liberty (Samuel Adams, John Hancock, Paul Revere). f.​ Compare and contrast the viewpoints of Loyalists and Patriots, and evaluate their
u413 arguments for and against independence from Britain. g.​ Compare and contrast the American colonies and the British in the American Revolution,
u414 including leadership, military power, recruitment, alliances, population, and resources, and evaluate their strengths and weaknesses. h.​ Explain the significance and outcome of key battles and turning points during the American
u415 Revolution, including the Battles of Lexington and Concord (1775), creation of the Continental Army and appointment of George Washington as Commander in Chief (1775), Battles of Trenton and Princeton (1776–1777), Battle of Saratoga (1777), encampment at Valley Forge (1777–1778), Franco-American alliance (1778), Battle of Yorktown (1781), and the Treaty of Paris of 1783. i.​ Explain the contributions of women to the American Revolution, including those of Abigail Adams, Mercy Otis-Warren, Mary Ludwig Hays, Deborah Sampson, Phillis Wheatley, and Betsy Ross. j.​ Explain the role of Spain and Spanish colonial Louisiana during the American Revolution and the effects of the conflict on the colony, including the roles of Bernardo de Galvez, the Battle of Lake Pontchartrain (1779), and the Battle of Baton Rouge (1779). k.​ Explain the role of espionage during the American Revolution, including the actions of spies
u416 for the colonies (Nathan Hale, Culper Spy Ring, John Clark, Enoch Crosby, Nancy Hart, and James Armistead Lafayette) and spies for Britain (Benedict Arnold). ●​ 6.12 Analyze the development of the U.S. political system through the ratification of the U.S. Constitution.
u417 a.​ Explain the purpose and importance of the Articles of Confederation. b.​ Describe the development of various state Constitutions and the effects of early
u418 abolitionists on the development of state government, including Olaudah Equiano, Benjamin Banneker, and Elizabeth Freeman. c.​ Explain the ideas and events leading to the ratification of the Constitution of the United
u419 States, including inadequacies of the Articles of Confederation and Shays’ Rebellion. d.​ Evaluate the major issues debated at the Constitutional Convention, including the key
u420 characteristics and features of the Articles of Confederation, the division and sharing of power between the federal and state governments (federal system), the Great Compromise, and slavery (Three-Fifths Compromise). e.​ Explain how the ideas of leading figures and Founding Fathers contributed to the
u421 Constitutional Convention and development of the U.S. government, including John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Alexander Hamilton, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, George Mason, William Patterson, Roger Sherman, George Washington, and James Wilson.
=== page 34 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u427 f.​ Explain the importance of ideas expressed in the Preamble to the Constitution of the United
u428 States, including the purpose and responsibilities of government and the concept of self-government. g.​ Explain the significance of the Commerce Clause, including its role in establishing a
u429 constitutional relationship between Native Americans and the U.S. government. h.​ Evaluate the arguments of Federalists and Anti-Federalists on the ratification of the
u430 Constitution expressed in the Federalist Papers and the writings of the Anti-Federalists. i.​ Explain how and why the Constitution of the United States was amended to include the Bill of Rights, and analyze the guarantees of civil rights and individual liberties protected in each of the first ten amendments. j.​ Analyze the key principles of government established by the Constitution of the United States, including federalism (enumerated, reserved, and concurrent powers), individual rights, judicial review, limited government, popular sovereignty and consent of the governed, rule of law, separation of powers, and a system of checks and balances. k.​ Explain the structure and processes of the United States government as outlined in the
u431 Constitution of the United States, including the branches of government, how a bill becomes a law at the federal level, and the process for amending the United States Constitution. l.​ Explain the structure, powers, and functions of the branches of the United States federal government (legislative, executive, and judicial), and describe the qualifications, roles, and responsibilities of elected and appointed government officials.
=== page 35 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u437 GRADE 7 ​ The United States and Louisiana: Early Republic Through Reconstruction
u438 Beginning with the presidency of George Washington, this course offers a chronological study of major events, issues, movements, individuals, and groups of people in the United States from a national and a Louisiana perspective. In this course, students will examine the development of the early republic, the Louisiana Purchase, the War of 1812, westward expansion, social and political reform movements of the nineteenth century, the growth of nationalism and sectionalism, the Civil War, and the Reconstruction period.
u439 ●​ 7.1 Explain ideas, events, and developments in the history of the United States of America from 1791 to 1877 and how they progressed, changed, or remained the same over time. ●​ 7.2 Analyze connections between ideas, events, and developments in U.S. history within their global context from 1791 to 1877. ●​ 7.3 Compare and contrast events and developments in U.S. history from 1791 to 1877. ●​ 7.4 Use geographic representations and historical data to analyze events and developments in U.S. history from 1791 to 1877, including environmental, cultural, economic, and political characteristics and changes. ●​ 7.5 Use maps to identify absolute location (latitude and longitude) and describe geographic characteristics of places in Louisiana, North America, and the world. ●​ 7.6 Use a variety of primary and secondary sources to: a.​ Analyze social studies content. b.​ Evaluate claims, counterclaims, and evidence. c.​ Compare and contrast multiple sources and accounts. d.​ Explain how the availability of sources affects historical interpretations. ●​ 7.7 Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary and/or secondary sources, social studies content knowledge, and clear reasoning and explanations to:
u440 a.​ Demonstrate an understanding of social studies content. b.​ Compare and contrast content and viewpoints. c.​ Analyze causes and effects. d.​ Evaluate counterclaims. ●​ 7.8 Analyze the influence of key events, ideas, and people on the economic, political, and social development of the United States from 1791 to the 1850s.
u441 a.​ Explain the causes and events of the Whiskey Rebellion, including the response from the
u442 Washington administration and its relationship to the enforcement of the government’s right to tax. b.​ Explain the influence of precedents set by the presidency of George Washington, and
u443 analyze the advice in and effects of his Farewell Address.
=== page 36 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u449 c.​ Analyze key events of the presidency of John Adams, including the Alien and Sedition Acts
u450 and the XYZ Affair. d.​ Explain the significance of the election of 1800. e.​ Explain how the disagreements between Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton
u451 resulted in the emergence of the Federalist and Democratic-Republican political parties, including views on foreign policy, Alien and Sedition Acts, economic policy, National Bank, funding, and assumption of the revolutionary debt. f.​ Describe the role of the Electoral College in presidential elections, including how it aims to
u452 ensure representation of less-populated states. g.​ Explain how the U.S. government addressed foreign and domestic challenges during the
u453 late 1700s to the mid-1800s and how related policies and legislation influenced the development of the United States. h.​ Analyze the major events of Thomas Jefferson’s presidency, including the Louisiana
u454 Purchase, Lewis and Clark expeditions, the Dunbar-Hunter Expedition of the Ouachita River, the Red River Expedition, and the Twelfth Amendment. ●​ 7.9 Analyze the causes, course of, and consequences of the War of 1812. a.​ Explain the events leading to the War of 1812, including Britain’s war with Napoleonic
u455 France, impressment, and blockades, and analyze the political and economic effects on the United States. b.​ Explain key events, turning points, and outcomes of the War of 1812, including blockades,
u456 the Battle of Lake Erie (1813), the Burning of Washington (1814), the Battle of New Orleans (1815), Battles of Baltimore and Lake Champlain (1814), penning of the Star-Spangled Banner, and the Treaty of Ghent (1814). c.​ Analyze the interests and motivations of Native American groups aligned with the United
u457 States and with Britain during the War of 1812, including Chief Tecumseh. d.​ Explain the importance and effects of the Battle of New Orleans to Louisiana, and describe
u458 the roles played by General Andrew Jackson and Jean Lafitte. e.​ Explain the events leading to and surrounding Louisiana statehood, including the Neutral
u459 Strip, the West Florida controversy, and the capture of the Spanish Fort at Baton Rouge, as well as key figures, including Julien de Lallande Poydras. ●​ 7.10 Analyze the growth and development of the United States from the early to mid-1800s. a.​ Describe the Era of Good Feelings (1815–1825), including Henry Clay’s American System,
u460 the Treaty of 1818, the Adams-Onis Treaty of 1819, and the development of transportation networks. b.​ Analyze the purpose of the Monroe Doctrine (1823), with emphasis on its policies of both
u461 isolationism and protection of American interests in the Western Hemisphere, and how it influenced U.S. foreign policy and interactions with other nations. c.​ Analyze the effects of Marbury v. Madison (1803), McCulloch v. Maryland (1819), Gibbons v.
u462 Ogden (1824), and Worcester v. Georgia (1832). d.​ Analyze the ideas and motivations that contributed to westward expansion, including
u463 Manifest Destiny, and its political, social, and economic effects.
=== page 37 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u469 e.​ Analyze the causes and effects of Indian Removal policies of the early to mid-1800s,
u470 including the Indian Removal Act of 1830, Trail of Tears, and Seminole Wars, and explain the role of key figures, including Andrew Jackson, Chief John Ross, and Chief Osceola. f.​ Analyze key events and developments that contributed to westward expansion, including
u471 the Oregon Treaty (1846), annexation of Texas (1845), Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (1848), Gadsden Purchase (1853), the Pony Express (1860), Pacific Railway Act (1862), and Homestead Act (1862). g.​ Explain the motivation and means of migration West, the experiences of the settlers, and
u472 the resulting changes in the West, including the Gold Rush (1848–1855), trails (Oregon Trail, Mormon Trail, and Santa Fe Trail), the first transcontinental telegraph, and the transcontinental railroad. h.​ Describe the causes, course, and consequences of the Mexican-American War, including
u473 the Battle of the Alamo, Battle of San Jacinto, annexation of Texas, the Mexican Cession, and Zachary Taylor’s role in the war and subsequent election to the presidency. i.​ Explain the causes and effects of the first Industrial Revolution in the United States, including advancements in technology, increased manufacturing, changing labor conditions, growing transportation systems, and urbanization. j.​ Analyze the development of the agrarian economy in the South, including Louisiana, and explain how advancements in technology, such as the cotton gin and multiple-effect evaporator for sugar, contributed to an increase in enslaved labor. k.​ Explain how steamboats influenced Louisiana’s economic growth and the significance of
u474 Captain Henry Miller Shreve in steamboat navigation. l.​ Compare and contrast the economies of the North and the South during the early to mid-1800s. m.​ Describe push and pull factors for immigration to the United States in the early to
u475 mid-1800s, and explain how migration within and to the United States affected rural and urban areas. ●​ 7.11 Analyze the role and importance of social and political reform movements of the nineteenth century.
u476 a.​ Analyze the key people, ideas, and events of the women’s rights movement and women's
u477 suffrage movement of the early to mid-1800s, including the Seneca Falls Convention, National Women’s Rights Conventions, Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lucretia Mott, Sojourner Truth, Mary Church Terrell, and Margaret Fuller. b.​ Explain the development of education and prison reform movements, including those led by
u478 Horace Mann and Dorothea Lynde Dix. c.​ Explain the effects of abolition efforts by key individuals and groups, including Sojourner
u479 Truth, William Lloyd Garrison, and the Quakers. d.​ Analyze the historical works and ideas of influential abolitionists, including Frederick
u480 Douglass’s speech “The Constitution of the United States: Is It Pro-Slavery or Anti-Slavery?” and Harriet Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin.
=== page 38 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u486 e.​ Describe the purpose, challenges, routes, and successes of the Underground Railroad and
u487 the key role played by Harriet Tubman. f.​ Explain restrictions placed on the trade of enslaved people prior to the Civil War, including
u488 the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 and the Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves of 1807. ●​ 7.12 Explain the ideas, key people, and events related to the growth of sectionalism and rising tension prior to the Civil War.
u489 a.​ Analyze major events, legislation, and court decisions from 1800 to 1861 that led to
u490 increasing sectionalism, including the Missouri Compromise of 1820, North Carolina v. Mann (1830), the Nullification Crisis (1831–1833), the Compromise of 1850, the Fugitive Slave Acts (1793, 1850), the Kansas-Nebraska Act (1854), and the Dred Scott decision (1857). b.​ Describe the reasons for the formation of the Republican Party in 1854 and its founding
u491 platform. c.​ Compare and contrast various arguments on the issue of slavery and states’ rights,
u492 including those expressed in the Lincoln-Douglas debates and during the 1860 presidential campaign. d.​ Explain the causes of and reactions to rebellions and raids, including the German Coast
u493 Uprising, Nat Turner’s Rebellion, and John Brown’s Raid on Harpers Ferry and subsequent trial. e.​ Analyze Lincoln’s First Inaugural Address and explain how the ideas expressed affected the
u494 cause and course of the Civil War. ●​ 7.13 Analyze the causes, course, and consequences of the Civil War. a.​ Explain why the Confederate States seceded from the Union. b.​ Explain Louisiana’s decision to secede from the Union and its effects, including the state's
u495 seizure of federal properties in Louisiana (the United States Arsenal and Barracks at Baton Rouge, United States Branch Mint). c.​ Describe the events leading to, significance of, and reaction to the Battle of Fort Sumter,
u496 including Lincoln’s call for 75,000 volunteers. d.​ Describe the importance and outcomes of the major military engagements of the Civil War,
u497 including Manassas, Shiloh, the Capture of New Orleans, Antietam, Gettysburg, Vicksburg, the Siege of Port Hudson, Sherman’s March to the Sea, and the surrender at Appomattox Court House. e.​ Describe the roles and experiences of soldiers, women, enslaved people, and freed people
u498 during the Civil War. f.​ Analyze the role of Louisiana in the Civil War and how the conflict affected Louisiana and its
u499 people, including the importance of its ports and the occupation of New Orleans. g.​ Analyze the purpose, significance, and consequences of the Emancipation Proclamation. h.​ Describe the roles and contributions of key individuals in the Civil War, including Jefferson
u500 Davis, Robert E. Lee, Thomas Stonewall Jackson, PGT Beauregard, Mary Walker, Clara Barton, Ulysses S. Grant, William Tecumseh Sherman, Robert Smalls, and the Louisiana Tigers.
=== page 39 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u506 i.​ Analyze Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address and Second Inaugural Address, and explain how the ideas expressed affected the course of the war, and show how ideas about equality changed over time. j.​ Describe the significance of Lincoln’s assassination and how it affected the nation. ●​ 7.14 Analyze the major events, key people, and effects of Reconstruction. a.​ Compare and contrast plans for Reconstruction, including Lincoln’s Ten Percent Plan,
u507 President Johnson’s Plan, and the Radical Republican Plan for Reconstruction. b.​ Analyze the development and effects of tenant farming and the sharecropping system in
u508 the postwar South. c.​ Explain how federal action affected individual rights and freedoms during the
u509 Reconstruction era, including through the Thirteenth Amendment, Freedmen’s Bureau, Civil Rights Bill of 1866, Reconstruction Act of 1867, Fourteenth Amendment, Fifteenth Amendment, and analyze the challenges, achievements, and effectiveness of each. d.​ Explain the rise of violence and intimidation of Black Americans by groups, including the Ku
u510 Klux Klan, White League, and Red Shirts, and describe the significance of the Opelousas and Colfax Massacres. e.​ Describe the role and motivations of carpetbaggers and scalawags during Reconstruction. f.​ Explain the roles of Black politicians in Southern states during Reconstruction, including
u511 Oscar Dunn and P.B.S. Pinchback. g.​ Explain how the presidential election of 1876 and the Compromise of 1877 led to the end of
u512 Reconstruction, and analyze the short-term effects of the collapse of Reconstruction, including the decline of Black Americans in elected offices and the loss of enforcement of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments. h.​ Analyze how Black Codes affected the lives of Black Americans, including the restriction of
u513 rights to own and lease property, conduct business, bear arms, and move freely through public spaces. i.​ Analyze how national events and amendments to the U.S. Constitution influenced Louisiana from the 1860s to 1877, including changes to the Louisiana Constitution.
=== page 40 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u519 GRADE 8 ​ The United States and Louisiana: Industrial Age Through Modern Era
u520 Beginning with the Second Industrial Revolution, this course offers a chronological study of major events, issues, movements, individuals, and groups of people in the United States from a national and a Louisiana perspective. In this course, students will examine the rise of the United States as an industrial and world power, World War I, the Great Depression, Huey P. Long, the Great Flood of 1927, World War II, the Cold War, the Civil Rights Movement, and the modern era.
u521 ●​ 8.1 Explain ideas, events, and developments in the history of the United States of America from 1877 to 2008 and how they progressed, changed, or remained the same over time. ●​ 8.2 Analyze connections between events and developments in U.S. history within their global context from 1877 to 2008. ●​ 8.3 Compare and contrast events and developments in U.S. history from 1877 to 2008. ●​ 8.4 Use geographic representations and historical data to analyze events and developments in U.S. history from 1877 to 2008, including environmental, cultural, economic, and political characteristics and changes. ●​ 8.5 Use maps to identify absolute location (latitude and longitude) and describe geographic characteristics of places in Louisiana, North America, and the world. ●​ 8.6 Use a variety of primary and secondary sources to: a.​ Analyze social studies content. b.​ Evaluate claims, counterclaims, and evidence. c.​ Compare and contrast multiple sources and accounts. d.​ Explain how the availability of sources affects historical interpretations. ●​ 8.7 Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary and/or secondary sources, social studies content knowledge, and clear reasoning and explanations to:
u522 a.​ Demonstrate an understanding of social studies content. b.​ Compare and contrast content and viewpoints. c.​ Analyze causes and effects. d.​ Evaluate counterclaims. ●​ 8.8 Analyze the causes and effects of technological and industrial advances during the late nineteenth century and the early twentieth century.
u523 a.​ Analyze factors that contributed to and effects of the growth of the industrial economy,
u524 including capitalism and the growth of free markets, mass production, agricultural advancements, the government’s laissez-faire economic policy, and the rise of corporations. b.​ Explain the social and economic effects of innovations in technology, transportation, and
u525 communication during the late 1800s and early 1900s, including the expansion of railroads, electricity, and the telephone.
=== page 41 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u531 c.​ Explain how industrialists and corporations revolutionized business and influenced the U.S.
u532 economy and society, with an emphasis on business practices (vertical and horizontal integration, formation of monopolies/trusts), development of major industries (oil, steel, railroad, banking), and the role of entrepreneurs, including Andrew Carnegie, J.P. Morgan, John D. Rockefeller, Cornelius Vanderbilt, and Madam C.J. Walker. ●​ 8.9 Analyze the social, political, and economic changes that developed in the United States during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
u533 a.​ Explain how industrialization influenced the movement of people from rural to urban areas
u534 and the effects of urbanization. b.​ Explain the causes and effects of immigration to the United States during the late 1800s
u535 and early 1900s, and compare and contrast the experiences of immigrants. c.​ Describe the working conditions and struggles experienced by the labor force that led to
u536 the labor movement (child labor, hours, safety, wages, standard of living), and evaluate the effectiveness of efforts to improve conditions. d.​ Describe the reasons for and effects of the rise of Populism in the United States and
u537 Louisiana during the late 1800s, including the role of the Grange, Farmers’ Alliance, and People’s Party. e.​ Analyze the causes and outcomes of the Progressive movement and the role of muckrakers,
u538 including the Meat Inspection Act, Pure Food and Drug Act, Seventeenth Amendment, Thomas Nast, Ida Tarbell, Upton Sinclair, and Jacob Riis. f.​ Analyze the government’s response to the rise of trusts and monopolies, including the
u539 passage of the Interstate Commerce Act of 1887, the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, and the Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914. g.​ Describe important ideas and events of presidential administrations during the late 1800s
u540 and early 1900s, with emphasis on Theodore Roosevelt’s administration and his support for trust busting, regulation, consumer protection laws, and conservation. h.​ Explain the origins and development of Louisiana public colleges and universities, including
u541 land-grant institutions, Historically Black Colleges and Universities, and regional universities. i.​ Analyze the events leading to Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) and the consequences of the decision, including changes to the Louisiana Constitution. j.​ Explain the emergence of the Jim Crow system and how it affected Black Americans. k.​ Explain the goals and strategies used by civil rights leaders of the late 1800s and early
u542 1900s, and analyze differing viewpoints of key figures and groups, including W.E.B. DuBois and the Niagara Movement, Booker T. Washington, NAACP, Mary Church Terrell, and Ida B. Wells. ●​ 8.10 Analyze ideas and events related to the expansion of the United States during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
u543 a.​ Explain the motivations for migration to and settlement of the West by various groups,
u544 including Exodusters, and how their motivations relate to the American Dream.
=== page 42 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u550 b.​ Analyze Frederick Turner’s "The Significance of the Frontier in American History.” c.​ Analyze how the lives of Native Americans changed as a result of westward expansion and
u551 U.S. policies, including the extermination of the buffalo, the reservation system, the Dawes Act, and assimilation. d.​ Analyze the causes and effects of conflict between Native Americans and the U.S.
u552 government and settlers during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, including the Battle of Little Bighorn and Wounded Knee and subsequent treaties. e.​ Analyze the events leading to and the effects of the U.S. acquisition of Hawaii. f.​ Analyze the ideas and events leading to the Spanish-American War and the short- and
u553 long-term outcomes, including the terms of the Treaty of Paris (1898), U.S. acquisition of Spanish territories, and emergence of the United States as a world power. g.​ Analyze the foreign policy achievements of Theodore Roosevelt, including the construction
u554 of the Panama Canal and the use of the Great White Fleet. ●​ 8.11 Analyze the causes, course, and consequences of World War I. a.​ Describe the causes of World War I, including militarism, alliances, imperialism, nationalism,
u555 and the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand. b.​ Explain the reasons for the initial U.S. policy of neutrality and isolationism. c.​ Analyze the events leading to U.S. involvement in World War I, including German submarine
u556 warfare, the sinking of the Lusitania, and the Zimmerman Telegram. d.​ Analyze how the United States mobilized for war and ways the American people contributed
u557 to the war effort on the home front and abroad, with an emphasis on military service, the role of women and minority groups, liberty bonds, and victory gardens. e.​ Explain how the U.S. government directed public support and responded to dissent during
u558 World War I, including through the use of wartime propaganda, the Committee on Public Information, the Espionage Act, the Sedition Act, and Schenck v. United States (1919). f.​ Explain how military strategies and advances in technology affected warfare and the
u559 course of World War I, including trench warfare, airplanes, machine guns, poison gas, submarines, and tanks. g.​ Describe the goals of leaders at the Paris Peace Conference, comparing Woodrow Wilson’s
u560 Fourteen Points and the Treaty of Versailles. h.​ Explain the reaction of the U.S. Senate to the Treaty of Versailles and the League of Nations,
u561 and describe the return to isolationism after the war. ●​ 8.12 Analyze the political, social, cultural, and economic effects of events and developments during the early twentieth century.
u562 a.​ Differentiate between the benefits and detriments of capitalism and communism, and
u563 explain how the concepts affected society during the early 1900s, including the Bolshevik Revolution and the first Red Scare. b.​ Describe the causes and consequences of Prohibition and the Eighteenth Amendment,
u564 including bootlegging and organized crime, and the repeal with the Twenty-First Amendment.
=== page 43 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u570 c.​ Explain how advances in transportation, technology, and media during the early twentieth
u571 century changed society and culture in the United States, including the automobile, radio, and household appliances. d.​ Explain the importance of the women's suffrage movement and events leading to the
u572 passage of the Nineteenth Amendment, including the role of key figures such as Susan B. Anthony, Lucy Burns, Carrie Chapman Catt, Alice Paul, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lucy Stone, and Ida B. Wells. e.​ Explain the causes and effects of social and cultural changes of the 1920s and 1930s on the
u573 United States, and describe the influence of notable figures of the Harlem Renaissance (Louis Armstrong, Duke Ellington, Ella Fitzgerald, Langston Hughes, Zora Neale Hurston, Sargent Claude Johnson, Augusta Savage) and cultural figures (Amelia Earhart, Ernest Hemingway, Jacob Lawrence, Jesse Owens, and Babe Ruth). f.​ Explain how various factors affected Louisiana’s economy during the early twentieth
u574 century, including booms in the timber, oil, and gas industries. g.​ Describe the causes of the Great Mississippi River Flood of 1927, and explain how the
u575 disaster and government response affected Louisianans. h.​ Analyze Louisiana politics in the early twentieth century, including the role of Huey Long's
u576 career in both Louisiana and national politics. i.​ Analyze causes and effects of changes to the Louisiana Constitution over time, with emphasis on revisions from 1879 to 1974. j.​ Explain the causes and effects of migration and population shifts in the United States during the early twentieth century, including the Great Migration. k.​ Analyze factors leading to and consequences of social and economic tensions in the early
u577 twentieth century, including the 1918 influenza outbreak, recession and inflation, labor strikes, resurgence of the Ku Klux Klan, Chicago Riot of 1919, and the Tulsa Massacre. ●​ 8.13 Analyze the causes and effects of the Great Depression. a.​ Explain the causes of the Great Depression, with an emphasis on how bank failures, buying
u578 stock on margin, overextension of credit, overproduction, high tariffs and protectionism, and the 1929 stock market crash contributed to the economic crisis. b.​ Explain the effects of the Great Depression on people, including rising unemployment,
u579 foreclosures, the growth of “Hoovervilles,” and soup kitchens. c.​ Describe the causes and effects of the Dust Bowl, including agricultural practices, drought,
u580 and migration. d.​ Describe the government response to the Great Depression, comparing the reaction of the
u581 Hoover and Roosevelt administrations. e.​ Analyze the purpose and effectiveness of the New Deal, including the Civilian Conservation
u582 Corps (CCC), Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), Agricultural Adjustment Act, National Recovery Administration, Public Works Administration, Glass-Steagall Act, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), Securities Exchange Act (SEC), National Housing Act, Works Progress Administration (WPA), and the Social Security Act (SSA).
=== page 44 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u588 ●​ 8.14 Describe the causes, course, and consequences of World War II. a.​ Explain the rise and spread of militarism and totalitarianism internationally, examining the
u589 similarities and differences between the ideologies of Imperial Japan, fascist Italy and Nazi Germany, and the communist Soviet Union, as well as the origins and effects of violence and mass murder in the 1930s and 1940s as demonstrated by the Nanjing Massacre, the Holodomor, the Holocaust, and treatment of political opponents and prisoners of war during World War II. b.​ Describe the acts of aggression leading to World War II in both Europe and Asia, and explain
u590 the effectiveness of policies and reactions, including the policy of appeasement towards Nazi Germany. c.​ Describe the causes of World War II, and analyze events that led to U.S. involvement in
u591 World War II, with emphasis on the attack on Pearl Harbor. d.​ Describe the role of alliances during World War II, including the Allies and Axis Powers. e.​ Explain the significance of major military actions and turning points during World War II in
u592 the Atlantic Theater (Battle of The Atlantic, Operation Torch, Battle of Normandy/Operation Overlord, Battle of The Bulge, Battle of Berlin) and the Pacific Theater (Battle of Bataan and Bataan Death March, Doolittle Raid, Battle of the Coral Sea, Battle of Midway, Battle of Leyte Gulf, Battle of Iwo Jima, Battle of Okinawa). f.​ Describe the roles and importance of key figures of World War II, including leaders from the
u593 United States (Franklin D. Roosevelt, Harry S. Truman, Dwight D. Eisenhower, George Patton, Douglas MacArthur), Great Britain (Sir Winston Churchill), France (Charles de Gaulle), the Soviet Union (Joseph Stalin), Germany (Adolf Hitler), Italy (Benito Mussolini), and Japan (Michinomiya Hirohito, Hideki Tojo). g.​ Explain the causes and consequences of the Holocaust, including antisemitism, the
u594 Nuremberg Laws restricting civil rights, resistance efforts, the experiences of people, including Anne Frank, the concentration camp system, liberation of camps by the Allies, and the Nuremberg trials. h.​ Describe the Tuskegee Study conducted on Black Americans from the 1930s to 1972. i.​ Explain the causes and effects of Japanese internment in the United States during World War II. j.​ Explain the sacrifices and contributions of U.S. soldiers during World War II, such as the Tuskegee Airmen, the 442nd Regimental Combat Team, the 101st Airborne, Cajun “Frenchies,” the Women's Army Corps (WAC), and the Navajo Code Talkers. k.​ Analyze how Louisiana contributed to the war effort during World War II and the effects of
u595 the war on Louisiana, including the role of the Louisiana Maneuvers, Higgins Boats in the success of the Allies, and prisoner of war (POW) camps in Louisiana. l.​ Explain how life in the United States changed during and immediately after World War II, with an emphasis on wartime production and the workforce, rationing, conservation, victory gardens, financing through war bonds, propaganda campaigns, and the Servicemen's Readjustment Act (GI Bill).
=== page 45 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u601 m.​ Explain the events that led to, and the conditions of the surrender of the Axis Powers in
u602 Europe and Asia, and describe the United States’ critical role in the Allied victory. n.​ Describe the importance of the Manhattan Project and the development of atomic bombs,
u603 and analyze the decision to use them. o.​ Explain how key decisions from Allied conferences during World War II, including the
u604 Atlantic Charter, Tehran, Yalta, and Potsdam, affected the course of the war and postwar world. ●​ 8.15 Analyze causes, major events, and key leaders of the Civil Rights Movement from 1954 to 1968. a.​ Analyze events during and immediately after World War II, leading to the Civil Rights
u605 Movement, including Executive Order 8022 and Executive Order 9981. b.​ Explain the origins and goals of the Civil Rights Movement of the 1950s and 1960s, and how
u606 segregation (de jure and de facto) affected African Americans and influenced the movement. c.​ Analyze how the murder of Emmett Till affected support for the Civil Rights Movement. d.​ Analyze the importance of the Brown v. Board of Education (1954) decision and subsequent
u607 efforts to desegregate schools, including those of the Little Rock Nine at Central High School in Arkansas, Ruby Bridges at William Frantz Elementary in Louisiana, and James Meredith at the University of Mississippi. e.​ Analyze the cause, course, and outcome of efforts to desegregate transportation, including
u608 the Baton Rouge Bus Boycott, Montgomery Bus Boycott, and Freedom Rides. f.​ Evaluate the effectiveness of methods (civil disobedience, boycotts, sit-ins, marches, drives)
u609 during the Civil Rights Movement, including during the 1960 Greensboro sit-ins, 1963 demonstrations in Birmingham, 1963 March on Washington, 1964 Freedom Summer, and 1965 Selma Marches. g.​ Analyze works of civil rights leaders, including Dr. King’s “Letter from Birmingham Jail” and
u610 his “I Have a Dream” speech, and explain how the ideas expressed in the works influenced the course of the Civil Rights Movement. h.​ Explain the role and importance of key individuals and groups of the Civil Rights Movement,
u611 including the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Rosa Parks, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), Medgar Evers, Shirley Chisholm, Fannie Lou Hamer, and Malcolm X. i.​ Explain reactions to the Civil Rights Movement by opposing individuals and groups, including George Wallace and Leander Perez. j.​ Analyze the role of the Supreme Court in advancing civil rights and freedoms during the 1950s and 1960s, including the court cases of Brown v. Board of Education (1954), Boynton v. Virginia (1960), and Bailey v. Patterson (1962). k.​ Evaluate legislation and amendments passed in response to the Civil Rights Movement,
u612 including the Twenty-Fourth Amendment, Civil Rights Act of 1964, Voting Rights Act of 1965, and Civil Rights Act of 1968.
=== page 46 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u618 ●​ 8.16 Explain the causes, course, and consequences of the Cold War. a.​ Explain how the ideologies of communism in the Soviet Union and capitalism in the United
u619 States influenced the Cold War and global tensions from 1945 to 1989. b.​ Evaluate the effectiveness of U.S. policies, programs, and negotiation efforts in
u620 accomplishing their intended goals, including the Marshall Plan, containment and related doctrines, mutual assured destruction, détente, Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT I and II), and Strategic Defense Initiative (Star Wars program). c.​ Analyze Cold War crises and conflicts and how they contributed to escalating tensions,
u621 including the Berlin Blockade and Airlift, Korean War, Suez Crisis, U-2 Incident, Cuban Missile Crisis, Bay of Pigs Invasion, Berlin Crisis of 1961, and Vietnam War, Soviet-Afghan War. d.​ Describe the role of organizations and alliances during the Cold War, including the United
u622 Nations, NATO, and the Warsaw Pact. e.​ Explain how events during the Cold War affected American society, including the Second
u623 Red Scare and McCarthyism. f.​ Explain how advances in technology and media during the mid- to late twentieth century
u624 changed society and public perception, including newspapers and television, the space race, and the nuclear arms race. g.​ Explain events and policies leading to the end of the Cold War and the collapse of the
u625 Soviet Union under the leadership of President Reagan, including political and economic pressures, policies of glasnost and perestroika, and the fall of the Berlin Wall. ●​ 8.17 Describe the importance of key ideas, events, and developments of the modern era. a.​ Explain how events and developments of the modern era have affected American society. b.​ Explain how relationships between the United States and the Middle East affected events
u626 and developments during the modern era, including the Persian Gulf Wars, the 1993 World Trade Center bombing, terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, the War on Terrorism, and the establishment of the Department of Homeland Security. c.​ Describe the effects of natural disasters on Louisiana and the United States, including
u627 Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. d.​ Describe important issues of the 2008 presidential election and the significance of the
u628 election of Barack Obama.
=== page 47 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u634 9-12
u635 (x=49) 9-12.SP1. Examine sources in order to:
u636 (x=121) A.​ Distinguish between primary, secondary, and tertiary sources. B.​ Determine the origin, author's point of view, intended audience, and reliability. C.​ Analyze the meaning of words, phrases, and content-specific vocabulary.
u637 (x=49) 9-12.SP2. Use a variety of primary and secondary sources to:
u638 (x=121) A.​ Analyze social studies content. B.​ Evaluate claims, counterclaims, and evidence. C.​ Compare and contrast multiple sources and accounts. D.​ Explain how the availability of sources affects historical interpretations.
u639 (x=49) 9-12.SP3. Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary and/or secondary sources, social studies content knowledge, and clear reasoning and explanations to:
u640 (x=121) A.​ Demonstrate an understanding of social studies content. B.​ Compare and contrast content and viewpoints. C.​ Analyze causes and effects. D.​ Evaluate counterclaims.
u641 HIGH SCHOOL ​Civics
u642 In the high school civics course, students broaden and deepen their understanding of the origin, structure, and functions of government. This course is designed to provide students with both the practical knowledge about how the American system of government functions on local, state, and national levels, as well as an understanding of the philosophical and intellectual underpinnings of our constitutional republic.
u643 ●​ C.1 Evaluate continuity and change in U.S. government, politics, and civic issues throughout U.S. history, including those related to the powers of government, interpretations of founding documents, voting trends, citizenship, civil liberties, and civil rights. ●​ C.2 Analyze causes and effects of events and developments in U.S. history, including those that influenced laws, processes, and civic participation. ●​ C.3 Compare and contrast events and developments in U.S. history and government. ●​ C.4 Explain connections between ideas, events, and developments related to U.S. history and government, and analyze recurring patterns, trends, and themes. ●​ C.5 Use geographic representations, demographic data, and geospatial representations to analyze civic issues and government processes.
=== page 48 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u649 ●​ C.6 Use a variety of primary and secondary sources to: a.​ Analyze social studies content. b.​ Evaluate claims, counterclaims, and evidence. c.​ Compare and contrast multiple sources and accounts. d.​ Explain how the availability of sources affects historical interpretations. ●​ C.7 Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary and/or secondary sources, social studies content knowledge, and clear reasoning and explanations to:
u650 a.​ Demonstrate an understanding of social studies content. b.​ Compare and contrast content and viewpoints. c.​ Analyze causes and effects. d.​ Evaluate counterclaims. ●​ C.8 Analyze factors that influenced the Founding Fathers and the formation and development of the government of the United States.
u651 a.​ Describe the purpose of government and competing ideas about the role of government in a
u652 society. b.​ Compare different systems and structures of government, including constitutional republic
u653 and autocracy, direct democracy and representative democracy, presidential system and parliamentary system, unicameral and bicameral legislatures, and unitary, federal, and confederate systems. c.​ Explain historical and philosophical factors that influenced the government of the United
u654 States, including Enlightenment philosophers such as Thomas Hobbes, John Locke, Charles de Montesquieu, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, as well as the Great Awakening. d.​ Analyze the foundational documents and ideas of the United States government and its
u655 formation, including Magna Carta, the Mayflower Compact, Enlightenment philosophies, English Bill of Rights, Declaration of Independence, the Articles of Confederation, the Constitution of the United States of America and the Bill of Rights, and the Federalist Papers, and their role and importance in the origin and development of the nation. e.​ Analyze the issues related to various debates, compromises, and plans surrounding the
u656 drafting and ratification of the 1789 Constitution of the United States. f.​ Explain how the concept of natural rights that precede politics or government influenced
u657 the foundation and development of the United States. g.​ Evaluate the fundamental principles and concepts of the U.S. government including
u658 Creator-endowed unalienable rights of the people, due process, equal justice under the law, equal protection, federalism, frequent and free elections in a representative government, individual responsibility, individual rights, limited government, private property rights, popular sovereignty, right to privacy, rule of law, the supremacy clause, and the separation of powers with checks and balances.
=== page 49 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u664 ●​ C.9 Analyze the structure, roles, responsibilities, powers, and functions of governments in the United States.
u665 a.​ Compare and contrast the powers and responsibilities of local, state, tribal (including the
u666 Chitimacha Tribe of Louisiana, the Coushatta Tribe of Louisiana, the Jena Band of Choctaw Indians, and the Tunica-Biloxi Indian Tribe), and federal governments, and explain how each is financed, how they interact with each other, and how citizens interact with and within each of them. b.​ Explain the structure and processes of the U.S. government as outlined in the U.S.
u667 Constitution, including the branches of government; federalism; how a bill becomes a law at the federal level; and the process for amending the U.S. Constitution. c.​ Analyze the structure, powers, and functions of the legislative branch of the U.S. federal
u668 government, including rules of operations of Congress; checks on the other branches of government; powers of the legislative branch such as those to make laws, declare war, tax and spend; and duties of representatives, senators, leadership (Speaker of the House, the Senate President Pro Tempore, majority and minority leaders, party whips), committees, and commissions. d.​ Analyze the structure, powers, and functions of the executive branch of the U.S. federal
u669 government, including checks on other branches of government; powers of the executive branch such as those to carry out and enforce laws, issue executive orders, and conduct diplomacy with other nations; duties of the president, vice president, and Cabinet; presidential nominations, appointments, and confirmations; and the concept of the “bully pulpit.” e.​ Analyze the structure, powers, and functions of the judicial branch of the U.S. federal
u670 government, including checks on the other branches of government; powers of the judicial branch, such as those to interpret laws and decide the constitutionality of laws; the nomination and appointment process of federal judges, origin of judicial review; and significance of stare decisis. f.​ Evaluate the reasoning for Supreme Court decisions and their political, social, and
u671 economic effects, including Marbury v. Madison (1803); McCulloch v. Maryland (1819); Cherokee Nation v. Georgia (1831); Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857); Plessy v. Ferguson (1896); Schenck v. United States (1919); Korematsu v. United States (1944); Brown v. Board of Education (1954); Baker v. Carr (1962); Engel v. Vitale (1962); Gideon v. Wainwright (1963); Miranda v. Arizona (1966); Loving v. Virginia (1967); Tinker v. Des Moines (1969); New York Times Co. v. United States (1971); Wisconsin v. Yoder (1972); Roe v. Wade (1973); United States v. Nixon (1974); Shaw v. Reno (1993); United States v. Lopez (1995); Bush v. Gore (2000); McDonald v. Chicago (2010); Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission (2010). g.​ Analyze how the Constitution has been interpreted and applied over time by the legislative,
u672 executive, and judicial branches, including loose and strict constructionist interpretations. h.​ Analyze how federal, state, and local governments generate and allocate revenues to carry
u673 out the functions of government.
=== page 50 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u679 i.​ Analyze continuity and change in the Louisiana State Constitution over time, and compare and contrast the Louisiana State Constitution and the U.S. Constitution. j.​ Explain the historical connections between Civil Law, the Napoleonic Code, and Louisiana’s system of laws. ●​ C.10 Evaluate how civil rights and civil liberties in the United States have developed and been protected by the U.S. government over time.
u680 a.​ Explain how the U.S. Constitution protects individual liberties and rights. b.​ Analyze the rights enumerated in the Bill of Rights and their application to historical and
u681 current issues. c.​ Evaluate restrictions and expansions of civil liberties and civil rights in the United States
u682 and the role of the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of the government in related events and developments over time, including the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments; Plessy v. Ferguson (1896); the Espionage and Sedition Acts; Schenck v. United States (1919); the Nineteenth Amendment; Executive Order 9066; Executive Order 10730; Brown v. Board of Education (1954); the Civil Rights Act of 1964; the Voting Rights Act of 1965; the Twenty-Fourth Amendment; and Twenty-Sixth Amendment. d.​ Describe equal protection and due process as defined by the U.S. Constitution, and explain
u683 how states subverted equal protection during the Jim Crow era. ●​ C.11 Analyze political processes and the role of public participation in the United States. a.​ Analyze the duties and responsibilities of citizens in the United States, including paying
u684 taxes, serving on a jury, obeying the law, voting, and Selective Service registration. b.​ Describe U.S. citizenship requirements and the naturalization process in the United States. c.​ Explain historical and contemporary roles of political parties, special interest groups,
u685 lobbies/lobbyists, and associations in U.S. politics. d.​ Explain rules governing campaign finance and spending and their effects on the outcomes
u686 of local, state, and federal elections. e.​ Explain election processes at the local, state, and federal levels, including qualifications
u687 and procedures for voting; qualifications and terms for offices; the primary system; public hearings and forums; petition, initiative, referendum, and recall; and amendments related to elections and voting. f.​ Evaluate the purpose, structure, and function of the Electoral College, including how it aims
u688 to ensure representation for less-populated states. g.​ Analyze issues and challenges of the election process, including gerrymandering, at-large
u689 voting, voter turnout, and voter access policies. h.​ Evaluate how the media affects politics and public opinion, including how public officials
u690 use the media to communicate with the people. i.​ Evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of technologies in politics and government and how they affect media, civic discourse, and the credibility of sources. j.​ Evaluate the processes for drawing Louisiana’s congressional districts and their effect on statewide and national elections.
=== page 51 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u696 k.​ Describe local and parish governments in Louisiana, including police juries and home rule
u697 charters. ●​ C.12 Analyze the issues of foreign and domestic policy of the United States. a.​ Distinguish between foreign and domestic policies, and analyze major U.S. foreign and
u698 domestic policies, including those in education; health care; immigration; naturalization; regulation of business and industry; foreign aid; and intervention abroad. b.​ Analyze the development, implementation, and consequences of U.S. foreign and domestic
u699 policies over time, including how U.S. policies are influenced by other countries and how they influence political debates. c.​ Analyze interactions between the United States and other nations over time and the effects
u700 of those interactions. d.​ Explain the origins and purpose of international organizations and agreements, including
u701 the United Nations, NATO, NAFTA, and USMCA, and analyze how the United States and member nations work to cooperate politically and economically. e.​ Describe the development of and challenges to international law after World War II and the
u702 Holocaust. ●​ C.13 Explain elements of the United States economy within a global context and economic principles required to make sound financial decisions.
u703 a.​ Explain ideas presented in Adam Smith's “The Wealth of Nations,” including his ideas about
u704 free markets and the “invisible hand.” b.​ Compare and contrast capitalism and socialism as economic systems. c.​ Describe different perspectives on the role of government regulation in the economy. d.​ Analyze the role of government institutions in developing and implementing economic
u705 policies, and explain the effects of government policies on market outcomes, including both intended and unintended consequences. e.​ Explain the factors that influence the production and distribution of goods by individuals
u706 and businesses operating in a market system, including monopolistic competition, perfect competition, monopoly, and oligopoly; credit; currencies; economic indicators; factors of production (land, labor, capital, entrepreneurship); goods and services; price; roles of consumers and producers; rule of law; and supply and demand. f.​ Explain ways in which competition, free enterprise, and government regulation influence
u707 what is produced and allocated in an economy, including national and global consequences. g.​ Explain the effects of specialization and trade on the production, distribution, and
u708 consumption of goods and services for individuals, businesses, and societies. ●​ C.14 Apply economic principles to make sound personal financial decisions, including regarding income, money management, spending and credit, and savings and investing.
u709 a.​ Explain the relationship between education, training, and career options to future earning
u710 potential. b.​ Apply given financial data to real-life situations such as balancing a checking account,
u711 reading bank and credit card statements, purchasing major goods, and avoiding consumer fraud.
=== page 52 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u717 c.​ Explain the benefits and risks of using credit and examine the various uses. d.​ Compare types of credit, savings, investment, and insurance services available to the
u718 consumer from various institutions. e.​ Create a budget and explain its importance in achieving personal financial goals and
u719 avoiding negative financial consequences.
=== page 53 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u725 HIGH SCHOOL ​United States History
u726 This course presents a cohesive and comprehensive overview of the history of the United States, surveying the major events and turning points of U.S. history as it moves from the Declaration of Independence through modern times. As students examine each era of history, they will analyze primary sources and carefully research events to gain a deeper understanding of the factors that have shaped U.S. history.
u727 ●​ US.1 Analyze ideas and events in the history of the United States of America from 1776 to 2008 and how they progressed, changed, or remained the same over time. ●​ US.2 Analyze connections between events and developments in U.S. history within their global context from 1776 to 2008. ●​ US.3 Compare and contrast events and developments in U.S. history from 1776 to 2008. ●​ US.4 Use geographic representations and demographic data to analyze environmental, cultural, economic, and political characteristics and changes. ●​ US.5 Use a variety of primary and secondary sources to: a.​ Analyze social studies content. b.​ Evaluate claims, counterclaims, and evidence. c.​ Compare and contrast multiple sources and accounts. d.​ Explain how the availability of sources affects historical interpretations. ●​ US.6 Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary and/or secondary sources, social studies content knowledge, and clear reasoning and explanations to:
u728 a.​ Demonstrate an understanding of social studies content. b.​ Compare and contrast content and viewpoints. c.​ Analyze causes and effects. d.​ Evaluate counterclaims. ●​ US.7 Analyze the development of the United States from the American Revolution through the ratification of the U.S. Constitution and the Early Republic.
u729 a.​ Explain the historical context of and the events leading to the signing of the Declaration of
u730 Independence, including the Boston Massacre, Boston Tea Party, Patrick Henry’s “Give Me Liberty or Give Me Death” speech, the battles at Lexington and Concord and Bunker Hill, the Second Continental Congress and failed Olive Branch Petition, and Thomas Paine’s Common Sense. b.​ Explain the key reasons for the Patriots’ improbable victory and analyze major battles of the
u731 American Revolution, including the Battle of Trenton, the Battle of Saratoga, and Yorktown. c.​ Analyze the Declaration of Independence and evaluate how the ideas expressed reflected
u732 the values and principles of the founders' and influenced development of the United States, with an emphasis on “inalienable rights” as inherent in all people by virtue of their being human meaning that they cannot be surrendered to the government; the rights to “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness” being the freedom to live, to protect rights, and to
=== page 54 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u738 seek happiness as long as it does not violate the rights of others; and the concept of “consent of the governed” and how this differed from rule under a monarch. d.​ Explain how America’s founding, based on the words of the Declaration of Independence
u739 and the U.S. Constitution, were unprecedented in human history. e.​ Explain the inadequacies of the Articles of Confederation. f.​ Analyze the purposes of the Preamble to the Constitution. g.​ Evaluate how the U.S. Constitution and Bill of Rights seek to prevent tyranny and protect
u740 individual liberty and freedom, including through representation, limited government, separation of powers, and checks and balances. h.​ Analyze major events and developments of U.S. presidents of the late 1700s to the early
u741 1800s, including the presidencies of George Washington (foreign and domestic policies, Farewell Address), John Adams (Alien and Sedition Acts), Thomas Jefferson (role in the Louisiana Purchase), and Andrew Jackson (Bank War). i.​ Analyze how Alexis de Tocqueville’s five values are crucial to America’s success as a constitutional republic (liberty, egalitarianism, individualism, populism, laissez-faire). j.​ Explain and evaluate the concept of American exceptionalism. ●​ US.8 Analyze key events associated with Westward Expansion during the early to mid-1800s. a.​ Explain the Louisiana Purchase and evaluate its effects on the United States. b.​ Analyze the causes and effects of the Indian Removal Act and describe the role of key
u742 people involved in Indian removal and the Trail of Tears, including Andrew Jackson and John Ross. c.​ Analyze the causes and effects of the Mexican-American War. d.​ Explain the concept of Manifest Destiny and evaluate its effect on Westward Expansion. ●​ US.9 Analyze the development and abolition of slavery in the United States. a.​ Describe the origins of the transatlantic slave trade, the Middle Passage, and the early
u743 spread of slavery in the Americas. b.​ Describe the experiences of enslaved people on the Middle Passage, at slave auctions, and
u744 on plantations. c.​ Describe the significance of the invention of the cotton gin and its effects on slavery and
u745 the economy. d.​ Explain how slavery contributed to U.S. industrial and economic growth. e.​ Explain the effects of abolition efforts by key individuals, including Sojourner Truth, William
u746 Lloyd Garrison, Frederick Douglass, and Harriet Beecher Stowe. f.​ Explain how slavery is the antithesis of freedom. g.​ Analyze the causes and effects of the Missouri Compromise, the Compromise of 1850, and
u747 the Kansas-Nebraska Act. h.​ Explain the outcome of the Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857) decision, including it later being
u748 called a “self-inflicted wound.” i.​ Describe the purpose of the Emancipation Proclamation and its effects.
=== page 55 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u754 j.​ Evaluate the significance and extension of citizenship rights to Black Americans included in the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments to the Constitution of the United States. ●​ US.10 Analyze the causes, course, and consequences of the Civil War and Reconstruction. a.​ Analyze the life of Abraham Lincoln, including his debates with Stephen Douglas, the
u755 meaning of his “House Divided” speech, presidency, and views on the Union, first and second inaugural addresses, the Emancipation Proclamation, the Gettysburg Address, particularly the origin and meaning of “last full measure of devotion,” and his assassination. b.​ Explain major and minor causes of the Civil War, especially the political tension surrounding
u756 the spread of slavery. c.​ Analyze major battles of the Civil War, including Shiloh, Antietam, Gettysburg, Vicksburg,
u757 and the capture of New Orleans. d.​ Compare and contrast the resources of the Union and Confederate States and the reasons
u758 attributed to the Union winning the Civil War. e.​ Explain the social, political, and economic changes that resulted from Reconstruction,
u759 including Jim Crow laws, the role of carpetbaggers, scalawags, Radical Republicans, the Freedmen’s Bureau, sharecropping, the creation of Black Codes, and the emergence of the Ku Klux Klan and the rise of violence and intimidation of Black Americans. ●​ US.11 Describe the economic and social development of the United States in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and its emergence as a major world power.
u760 a.​ Describe how the physical geography of the United States affected industrial growth and
u761 trade. b.​ Explain the economic principles and practices that corresponded with America’s industrial
u762 and economic growth after the Civil War, including free markets, capitalism, mass production, division of labor, and monopolies. c.​ Explain push and pull factors for immigration to the United States in the late nineteenth and
u763 early twentieth centuries and analyze the immigrant experience, including assimilation, challenges, and contributions. d.​ Analyze the challenges that accompanied industrialization, including pollution, poor
u764 working conditions, child labor, and food safety, as well as proposed solutions of the Progressive Era. e.​ Analyze the Monroe Doctrine, the Roosevelt Corollary, and the development of U.S. foreign
u765 policy in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, including the Spanish-American War, the acquisition of Hawaii and Alaska, the construction of the Panama Canal, and the U.S. expedition to capture Pancho Villa. f.​ Analyze the life of Theodore Roosevelt, including his life in the West, the Rough Riders, his
u766 “Big Stick” diplomacy, presidency, and conservation efforts. g.​ Describe engagements between the U.S. government forces and Native Americans in the
u767 West following the Civil War, including the Battle of Little Bighorn and Wounded Knee, and the effects of the Dawes Act on Native Americans.
=== page 56 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u773 h.​ Analyze the life of Booker T. Washington, including his enslavement and emancipation, the
u774 Tuskegee Institute, and his Atlanta Exposition Speech. i.​ Explain the origins and development of Louisiana public colleges and universities, including land-grant institutions, Historically Black Colleges and Universities, and regional universities. j.​ Compare and contrast the philosophies of Booker T. Washington, W. E. B. DuBois, and Marcus Garvey. k.​ Explain Elizabeth Cady Stanton’s reasons for writing the Declaration of Sentiments. l.​ Analyze the life of Susan B. Anthony, including her time teaching, work for abolition, work for temperance, and work for suffrage. m.​ Analyze ways in which the Suffrage Movement led to the passage of the Nineteenth
u775 Amendment. ●​ US.12 Analyze the causes, course, and consequences of World War I. a.​ Describe the causes of World War I. b.​ Explain the events leading to and reasons for U.S. involvement in World War I. c.​ Describe the effects of major military events, the role of key people, and the experiences of
u776 service members. d.​ Analyze the suppression of dissent during World War I. e.​ Explain why the Allied Powers won World War I. f.​ Compare and contrast Wilson’s Fourteen Points and the Treaty of Versailles. ●​ US.13 Analyze the political, social, cultural, and economic effects of events and developments after World War I and during the 1920s.
u777 a.​ Explain the origins, main ideas, contributors, and effects of the Harlem Renaissance. b.​ Describe changes in the social and economic status of women. c.​ Analyze how life in the United States changed as a result of technological advancements,
u778 including the automobile, airplane, and radio. d.​ Analyze the causes and events of the First Red Scare, including the Bolshevik Revolution,
u779 anarchist bombings, the Immigration Act of 1918, and the Palmer Raids. e.​ Analyze the rise in labor unions in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,
u780 including the American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO), the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), and the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters. f.​ Analyze the effects of changes in immigration to the United States and migration within the
u781 United States as a result of the Immigration Act of 1924 and the Great Migration. g.​ Describe Prohibition in the United States and its consequences, including the development
u782 of organized crime. h.​ Describe the effects of racial and ethnic tensions, including the Chicago Riot of 1919, the
u783 Tulsa Massacre, and the re-emergence of the Ku Klux Klan. ●​ US.14 Describe the effects of the Great Depression and New Deal policies on the United States. a.​ Explain the causes of the Great Depression, with an emphasis on how bank failures, buying
u784 stock on margin, overextension of credit, overproduction, high tariffs and protectionism, and the 1929 stock market crash contributed to the economic crisis.
=== page 57 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u790 b.​ Describe the effects of the Great Depression. c.​ Analyze the government response to the Great Depression, including actions taken by the
u791 Federal Reserve, Congress, and the administrations of Herbert Hoover and Franklin D. Roosevelt. d.​ Describe the causes and effects of the Dust Bowl, including natural disasters and unwise
u792 agricultural practices, and how it exacerbated the Great Depression. e.​ Analyze the purpose and effectiveness of the New Deal in managing problems of the Great
u793 Depression through relief, recovery, and reform programs, including the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), the Works Progress Administration (WPA), the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), and the Social Security Act (SSA). f.​ Compare and contrast the economic beliefs of Adam Smith, Karl Marx, John Maynard
u794 Keynes, and Milton Friedman, and analyze their influence on the economy of the United States. ●​ US.15 Explain the causes, course, and consequences of World War II. a.​ Explain the similarities and differences between totalitarianism and militarism in Imperial
u795 Japan, communism in the Soviet Union, fascism in Mussolini’s Italy, and Nazi Germany, and identify the major powers of the Allies and the Axis powers. b.​ Explain efforts made by the U.S. government to prepare for war prior to entry, including
u796 Cash and Carry and Lend-Lease policies, military maneuvers at Barksdale Air Force Base, and the Louisiana Maneuvers in September 1941. c.​ Explain why Japan attacked Pearl Harbor and the response of the United States. d.​ Describe the sacrifices and contributions of American service members in the war effort,
u797 including the Tuskegee Airmen, Military Intelligence Service, 442nd Regimental Combat Team, the 101st Airborne, Women's Army Corps (WAC), Navajo Code Talkers, and the Army Signal Corps. e.​ Explain the causes and effects of the internment of Japanese Americans in the United
u798 States during World War II, as well as the decision in Korematsu v. United States (1944) and the Civil Liberties Act of 1988. f.​ Explain how the U.S. government managed the war effort on the home front, including
u799 campaigns to conserve food and fuel, the sale of war bonds, and the coordination of wartime production. g.​ Explain the role of military intelligence, technology, and strategy during World War II,
u800 including cryptology, the Manhattan Project, island hopping, and describe major battles of Midway, Normandy, Iwo Jima, Okinawa, and the Battle of the Bulge. h.​ Describe the roles of Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry Truman, and the United States’ critical
u801 role in the Allied victory. i.​ Analyze the decision for and the effects of dropping atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. j.​ Explain the use of violence and mass murder as demonstrated by the Nanjing Massacre, the Holodomor, the Holocaust, the Bataan Death March, and the treatment of U.S. prisoners of war.
=== page 58 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u807 k.​ Analyze the Holocaust, including the suspension of basic civil rights by the Third Reich, the
u808 concentration camp system, antisemitism, persecution of Jews and non-Jews, Jewish and non-Jewish resistance, the role played by the United States in liberating Nazi concentration camps, immigration of Holocaust survivors, and the Nuremberg trials. l.​ Describe the establishment of the United Nations and its role in global affairs after World War II. ●​ US.16 Analyze causes, major events, and key leaders of the Civil Rights Movement. a.​ Analyze the origins and goals of the Civil Rights Movement, the effects of segregation (de
u809 jure and de facto), and efforts to desegregate schools, transportation, and public places. b.​ Analyze how the ideas, work, and life of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. influenced civil rights
u810 movements in the United States, including civil disobedience, service with the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), writings such as his “Letter from a Birmingham Jail” and “I Have a Dream” speech, and his assassination. c.​ Explain how key individuals and groups contributed to the expansion of civil rights in the
u811 United States, including A. Philip Randolph, Jackie Robinson, Rosa Parks, Medgar Evers, Ruby Bridges, Shirley Chisholm, John Lewis, Malcolm X, and Thurgood Marshall. d.​ Analyze the role and importance of key events during the Civil Rights Movement, including
u812 the murder of Emmett Till, the Baton Rouge Bus Boycott, the Montgomery Bus Boycott, the Little Rock Central High School desegregation, the Greensboro Sit-Ins, the Freedom Rides, demonstrations in Birmingham, the 1963 March on Washington, Freedom Summer, and the Selma to Montgomery Marches. e.​ Analyze the role of the federal government in advancing civil rights, including Brown v.
u813 Board of Education (1954), the Twenty-Fourth Amendment, the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and the Voting Rights Act of 1965. f.​ Analyze the goals and outcomes of the American Indian Movement (AIM) and the changing
u814 relationship between Native Americans and the federal government, including before and after the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act. g.​ Analyze the goals and course of the women’s rights movement of the mid- to late twentieth
u815 century, with attention to House Resolution 5056, Equal Pay Act, Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education Amendments, Equal Rights Amendment, and the advancement of women in government and various professions. ●​ US.17 Explain major events and developments of the post-World War II era in the United States and its continued rise as a world power.
u816 a.​ Explain the causes and effects of the Marshall Plan, the formation of NATO, and the Warsaw
u817 Pact. b.​ Analyze domestic policies of Dwight D. Eisenhower’s presidential administration, including
u818 the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956. c.​ Compare ideas of the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War, including the
u819 strengths of American principles such as rights, equality of opportunity, liberty, and equal protection under the law.
=== page 59 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u825 d.​ Describe the role of and major events and developments associated with key leaders during
u826 the Cold War, including U.S. presidents (Harry S. Truman, Dwight D. Eisenhower, John F. Kennedy, Lyndon B. Johnson, Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, and Ronald Reagan); and Soviet leaders (Nikita Khrushchev and Mikhail Gorbachev). e.​ Analyze the causes, course of, and consequences of the Cold War and its related crises and
u827 conflicts, including the Berlin Blockade and Airlift, Chinese Civil War, Korean War, Suez Crisis, U-2 Incident, Cuban Missile Crisis, Bay of Pigs Invasion, Vietnam War, Soviet-Afghan War, and Miracle on Ice. f.​ Explain the role of technology in the Cold War, including the Space Race, Sputnik, and the
u828 Apollo 13 mission. g.​ Analyze the effects of the campaign, election, inaugural address, presidency, and
u829 assassination of John F. Kennedy. h.​ Analyze the role of Lyndon B. Johnson Civil Rights Movement and the Vietnam War. i.​ Explain the term "silent majority" in the context of Richard Nixon's presidency, the Watergate scandal, his efforts to open trade with China, and his resignation. j.​ Explain the outcome and consequences of key Supreme Court decisions in the late twentieth century, including Gideon v. Wainwright (1963), Miranda v. Arizona (1966), and Roe v. Wade (1973). k.​ Explain factors that led to the end of the Cold War, the fall of communism, and the collapse
u830 of the Soviet Union, including foreign policy pressures; Reagan’s “Tear Down this Wall” speech, the fall of the Berlin Wall; glasnost and perestroika; and the decline of communism. l.​ Explain how the failure of the communist economic and political policy, American foreign policy pressure, and the assertion of American principles such as rights, equality, and liberty led to the end of the Cold War. ●​ US.18 Explain major U.S. events and developments in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries.
u831 a.​ Analyze Ronald Reagan’s political career (“A Time for Choosing” speech) and key policies of
u832 his presidency (four pillars of Reaganomics: reduce taxes, reduce federal spending, reduce government regulation, tighten the money supply). b.​ Explain the effects of major issues and events of the late twentieth century, including the
u833 HIV/AIDS epidemic and disease perceptions, the war on drugs, and the space shuttle Challenger disaster. c.​ Explain the causes of the Gulf War, its major military leaders, and unity on the home front. d.​ Explain the causes and effects of domestic incidents, terrorism, and mass shootings,
u834 including the Ruby Ridge incident, Waco siege, Oklahoma City Bombing, and Columbine High School shooting. e.​ Analyze the effects of advancements in technology and media during the mid- to late
u835 twentieth century, including the radio, television, and the internet. f.​ Explain events leading up to the September 11th attacks, the attack on New York City, the
u836 attack on the Pentagon, Flight 93, President George W. Bush’s speech from Barksdale Air
=== page 60 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u842 Force Base, the lives lost, national unity in the aftermath, subsequent military operations, and the expansion of intelligence agencies. g.​ Compare the judicial philosophies of Supreme Court justices of the twentieth and
u843 twenty-first centuries, including those of Antonin Scalia and Ruth Bader Ginsburg. h.​ Analyze the presidential administrations of George H.W. Bush (Gulf War), Bill Clinton
u844 (influence of the Contract with America on the legislative agenda, involvement in Bosnia), and George W. Bush (September 11th). i.​ Explain important issues of the 2008 presidential election and the significance of the election of Barack Obama.
=== page 61 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u849 HIGH SCHOOL ​World History
u850 This course presents a cohesive and comprehensive overview of the history of the world from 1300 to 2010. As students examine each era of history, they will analyze primary sources and carefully research events to gain a deeper understanding of the factors that have shaped world history. In this course, students will examine fourteenth-century trade networks of Africa and Eurasia, the Renaissance and Enlightenment in Europe, political revolutions, industrialization, imperialism, global conflicts of the twentieth century, decolonization, and globalization.
u851 ●​ WH.1 Analyze ideas and events in world history from 1300 to 2010 and how they progressed, changed, or remained the same over time. ●​ WH.2 Analyze connections between events and developments in world history within their global context from 1300 to 2010. ●​ WH.3 Use geographic representations and demographic data to analyze environmental, cultural, economic, and political characteristics and changes. ●​ WH.4 Use a variety of primary and secondary sources to: a.​ Analyze social studies content. b.​ Evaluate claims, counterclaims, and evidence. c.​ Compare and contrast multiple sources and accounts. d.​ Explain how the availability of sources affects historical interpretations. ●​ WH.5 Construct and express claims that are supported with relevant evidence from primary and/or secondary sources, social studies content knowledge, and clear reasoning and explanations to:
u852 a.​ Demonstrate an understanding of social studies content. b.​ Compare and contrast content and viewpoints. c.​ Analyze causes and effects. d.​ Evaluate counterclaims. ●​ WH.6 Evaluate the influence of science, technology, and innovations, and explain how these developments have altered societies in the world from 1300 to 2010. ●​ WH.7 Analyze causes and effects of events and developments in world history from 1300 to 2010, including fourteenth-century trade networks of Africa and Eurasia, Renaissance and Enlightenment in Europe, political revolutions, industrialization, imperialism, global conflicts of the twentieth century, decolonization, and globalization. ●​ WH.8 Analyze the relationship between events and developments in Louisiana history and world history from 1300 to 2010. ●​ WH.9 Analyze the origins and emergence of economic principles such as feudalism, mercantilism, capitalism, socialism, and communism and their effects on political institutions throughout the world from 1300 to 2010.
=== page 62 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u857 ●​ WH.10 Analyze the causes and effects of global and regional conflicts in the world from 1300 to 2010. a.​ Analyze the causes, effects, and reactions to imperialism from 1450 to 1945 and the
u858 experiences of those who were colonized. b.​ Analyze causes and effects of political revolutions of the eighteenth, nineteenth, and
u859 twentieth centuries throughout the world. ●​ WH.11 Analyze the development of political and social structures throughout the world from 1300 to 1600.
u860 a.​ Analyze how various religious philosophies have influenced government institutions and
u861 policies from 1300 to 2010. b.​ Analyze the development and contribution of enlightenment ideas such as humanism, state
u862 of nature, and natural rights to the structure and function of civic and political institutions from 1600 to 2010. c.​ Analyze how civic ideals such as freedom, liberty, and equal justice have influenced world
u863 governments from 1300 to 2010. d.​ Compare and contrast systems of governance, including absolutism, communism,
u864 democracy, imperialism, fascism, monarchism, and republicanism across world history in the period from 1300 to 2010, and their methods of maintaining power. e.​ Analyze the historical connections between Civil Law, the Napoleonic Code, and Louisiana’s
u865 system of laws. f.​ Explain the powers and responsibilities of local, state, tribal, national, and international civic
u866 and political institutions and their efforts to address social and political problems. ●​ WH.12 Describe various systems, laws, and policies of governance across world history in the period from 1300 to 2010 and their methods of maintaining power, including absolutism, communism, democracy, imperialism, fascism, theocracies, monarchism, and republicanism. ●​ WH.13 Analyze the origins, consequences, and legacies of genocides that occurred in world history from 1914 to 2010. ●​ WH.14 Analyze the causes of decolonization, methods of gaining independence, and geopolitical impacts of new nation-states from 1945 to 2010. ●​ WH.15 Analyze the roles of various countries during the Cold War and their roles in post-Cold War international agreements and organizations. ●​ WH.16 Analyze ideals and principles that contributed to the rise of independence movements from 1300 to 2010. ●​ WH.17 Analyze goals, strategies, and effects of movements, both violent and non-violent, to gain freedom and political and social equality in world history from 1914 to 2010. ●​ WH.18 Describe how global, national, and regional economic policies affect individual life decisions over time. ●​ WH.19 Analyze the influence of fiscal policies such as taxation and tariffs, trade embargoes, and spending policies on national economies.
=== page 63 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u871 ●​ WH.20 Describe the causes of trade, commerce, and industrialization and how they affected governments and societies from 1300 to 2010. ●​ WH.21 Explain the economic, demographic, social, and cultural consequences of coerced labor throughout the world. ●​ WH.22 Analyze trends of increasing economic interdependence and interconnectedness in world history from 1300 to 2010. ●​ WH.23 Analyze the effects of natural resources on the development of the Louisiana economy within the context of global interdependence. ●​ WH.24 Analyze the effect that humans have had on the environment in terms of resources, migration patterns, and global environmental issues. ●​ WH.25 Explain the relationship between the physical environment and culture on local, national, and global scales. ●​ WH.26 Analyze the causes and effects of the movement of people, culture, religion, goods, diseases, and technologies through established systems of connection. ●​ WH.27 Explain how regional interactions shaped the development of empires and states from 1300 to 2010. ●​ WH.28 Explain the effectiveness of institutions designed to foster collaboration, compromise, and development from the post-Napoleonic era to the present. ●​ WH.29 Analyze how advancements in communication, technology, and trade have affected global interactions from 1300 to 2010. ●​ WH.30 Analyze patterns of population distribution and migration from 1300 to 2010.
=== page 64 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u875 HIGH SCHOOL​ World Geography
u876 In the high school world geography course, students will develop geographic and spatial thinking skills to better understand the different people, places, and environments around the world. Students will examine various themes, including population, culture, migration, urbanization, agriculture, economics, and political systems.
u877 ●​ WG.1 Describe economic, social, cultural, political, and physical characteristics of countries, nations, and world regions. ●​ WG.2 Analyze geographic patterns and processes using spatial knowledge of the world’s continents, major landforms, major bodies of water, and major countries. ●​ WG.3 Connect past events, people, and ideas to the present to draw conclusions and explain current implications. ●​ WG.4 Describe how geographic tools, representations, and technologies are used in the study of geography.
u878 a.​ Create and use geographic representations, data, and geospatial technologies to analyze
u879 geographic patterns and changes over time, including maps, satellite images, photographs, charts, graphs, population pyramids, GIS, and GPS. b.​ Describe the influence of technology on the study of geography and gather geographic
u880 information using technological tools. c.​ Compare and contrast various types of maps and map projections, and evaluate distortions
u881 associated with each map projection. d.​ Analyze how maps and data illustrate territorial divisions and regional classification of the
u882 Earth’s surface. ●​ WG.5 Explain the spatial relationships of human settlement, migration, and population. a.​ Explain the patterns and processes of human settlement and migration. b.​ Analyze population growth over time and predict future trends. c.​ Evaluate how historical processes, including cultural diffusion, colonialism, imperialism,
u883 trade, urbanization, and migration, have affected countries and world regions. d.​ Explain how landscape features and natural resource use can reflect cultural attributes. e.​ Evaluate the consequences of globalization, the acceleration of communication, and the
u884 diffusion of ideas, information, and culture. ●​ WG.6 Analyze geographic factors that influence economic development. a.​ Explain the spatial patterns of industrial production and development. b.​ Analyze the distribution of resources and describe their influence on individuals,
u885 businesses, and countries. c.​ Analyze factors that influence the economic development of countries. d.​ Describe social and economic measures of development in various countries. e.​ Explain how economic interdependence and globalization affect countries and their
u886 populations.
=== page 65 === [running header: ​ | Louisiana Department of Education doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 •]
u890 f.​ Analyze the historical and contemporary economic influence that Louisiana has on other
u891 parts of the United States and on the broader world. g.​ Analyze the historical and contemporary effects that globalization has on Louisiana's
u892 economy. ●​ WG.7 Analyze how governments and political boundaries affect people and places. a.​ Compare various systems of government in terms of division of power, economic ideologies,
u893 and power structure. b.​ Analyze various economic philosophies, including capitalism, socialism, and communism,
u894 that have influenced the development of political and economic systems. c.​ Evaluate the purpose of political institutions at various levels, local to supranational, and
u895 distinguish their roles, powers, and limitations. d.​ Analyze how political boundaries are created and how they affect political institutions. e.​ Describe nations and states using appropriate terminology. f.​ Analyze actions in various regions taken by individuals, groups, regional governments, and
u896 supranational organizations to expand freedoms and protect human rights. g.​ Evaluate factors that contribute to cooperation and conflict, including trade, natural
u897 resources, and land acquisition. h.​ Explain the degree to which cooperation and conflict have affected countries and world
u898 regions. ●​ WG.8 Analyze how people have modified or adapted to the environment locally, nationally, regionally, and globally.
u899 a.​ Analyze effects of human settlement patterns and land use on the natural environment. b.​ Identify ways in which people have attempted to mitigate the effects of natural disasters. c.​ Analyze causes and effects of local, national, regional, and global environmental issues.
