=== page 1 ===
u1 Social Studies Supplemental Lesson Checklist
u2 PURPOSE:
u3 This checklist is intended for educators to use when selecting supplemental lesson materials for classroom instruction, or to evaluate educator-created instructional materials. This checklist focuses on best practices for inquiry-driven instruction in social studies courses and is not intended to be used as an evaluation tool for educators. This checklist can be used to facilitate dialogue about lesson plans between educators and administrators. This checklist should serve as a support to guide educators, administrators, coaches, and instructional leaders in identifying high-quality social studies instruction and improving implementation of OSSE’s Social Studies Standards. The supplemental lesson rubric focuses on lesson design specific to social studies practice.
u4 SUPPLEMENTARY INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS:
u5 materials used to reinforce, enrich, or enhance instruction driven by core instructional material.
u6 SUGGESTED STRUCTURE OF A SOCIAL STUDIES LESSON:
u7 (x=331) MULTIPLE
u8 (x=97) ENGAGE STUDENTS AND ESTABLISH
u9 (x=332) SOURCES
u10 (x=459) DISCUSSION/ SYNTHESIS OF
u11 (x=230) CENTRAL
u12 (x=234) LESSON QUESTION
u13 (x=321) DISCIPLINARY
u14 (x=82) BACKGROUND
u15 (x=466) LEARNING
u16 (x=330) THINKING
u17 (x=85) KNOWLEDGE
u18 (x=340) SKILLS
u20 The components above may take place over several successive class periods, and each component correlates to some elements of the rubric below. In general, establishing background knowledge connects to the introduction of any learning activity. The Central Lesson Question contributes to the Inquiry focus of the lesson, and the sections of the rubric entitled Focus on Disciplinary Reading, Thinking and Reasoning, Representation and Historical Agency, Lessons Scaffolded for Student Success can be evaluated by considering the source sets or student facing materials included in lesson materials.
u21 This checklist is intended for use in evaluating supplemental lessons; however, this is not an exhaustive list for social studies instructional outcomes. Extended projects such as National History Day, Civic Action Projects, and other similar programs that are aligned with the OSSE Social Studies Standards and that support students in building their civic and historical efficacy skills may not be reflected in the rubric below.
u22 DIRECTIONS:
u23 Users should use the rubric below to evaluate proposed assessment tasks. Following the initial evaluation of assessment tasks, reviewers should determine if the assessment: • Meets expectations - All the indicators below are met by the lesson plan.
u24 • Partially meets expectations - Most of the indicators are met by the lesson plan.
u25 • Does not meet expectations - Less than 50 percent of the indicators are met by the lesson plan or the lesson plan does not meet the Standards Alignment or Representation and Historical Agency criterion.
u26 If the assessment does not meet expectations, the local education agency (LEA) or educator should identify an alternate lesson plan that is aligned to the expectations set forth by the social studies standards. If the lesson partially meets expectations, the reviewer should consider what changes need to be made to ensure the lesson plan represents a high-quality instructional experience for students.
u27 1 Graphic adapted from Professor Abby Reisman, associate professor of Teacher Education in the Teaching, Learning, and Leadership Division at University of Pennsylvania, Graduate School of Education.
=== page 2 ===
u28 HIGH-QUALITY INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS CHECKLIST
u29 [T1 R1 C1] Criterion for Success
u30 [T1 R1 C2] Indicators
u31 [T1 R2 C1] Standards Alignment
u32 [T1 R2 C2] F The lesson materials align clearly to both the content and skills expectations articulated by the grade level standards in the OSSE Social Studies Standards.
u33 [T1 R3 C1] Inquiry Focus
u34 [T1 R3 C2] F Lesson materials are structured around a central questoi n that elicits instructoi nal tension between several legitmi ate civic, historical, economic or geographic perspectvi es or interpretatoi ns. F The central lesson questoi n and the majority of supportni g questoi ns necessitate evaluatvi e rather than factual responses. F The lesson questoi n provides opportunitei s for students to apply a critci al lens to the past and/ or present. F The questoi n is accessible, narrow in scope, and answerable using the materials and evidence provided during instructoi n. F Lesson materials are centered on opportunitei s for students to evaluate the utliity of difef rent sources of informatoi n for answering a central questoi n.
u35 [T1 R4 C1] Lesson Framing and Contextualization
u36 [T1 R4 C2] F Lesson materials provide students with sufficient background knowledge for interpreting and analyzing the central lesson question. This can be through direct instruction, background readings, or similar didactic lesson materials. F Historical content provided is in service of supporting skill-based, student-centered instruction. F Developing background knowledge facilitates student engagement in critical inquiry and comprises a small component (less than 15 percent) of the learning time.
u37 [T1 R5 C1] Focus on Disciplinary Reading, Thinking and Reasoning.
u38 [T1 R5 C2] F Students have opportunities to assess the utility and limitations of primary and/ or secondary texts through historical thinking skills such as sourcing, corroboration, close reading, and/or contextualization of evidence. F Source materials contain clear information about the circumstances in which it was created through headnotes or footnotes. F Source analysis moves beyond text comprehension and summarizing informational texts into evaluation and analysis of information utility.
u39 [T1 R6 C2] Source Set Considerations: F Each source should provide additional nuance or a contrasting perspective in evaluating the central lesson question. F Each source should include easily accessible information about the circumstances in which it was created. o Note that this information should move beyond the name of the author and date in which the document was created, and should include information about the author and circumstances of creation that can help a student make determinations about reliability.
u40 [T1 R7 C1] Representation and Historical Agency
u41 [T1 R7 C2] F Students have opportunities to analyze a diversity of perspectives, voices, and narratives. F Individuals within the lesson are represented as having agency in their own decision making and actions, and individuals are presented with dignity. F Students have opportunities to question historical narratives and build their own interpretations of the past and present grounded in valid critical analysis of available information. F Instruction does not promote inaccurate and harmful stereotypes or engage students in harmful learning experiences, including simulations. F Materials utilize historically accurate terminology to describe the past. F When applicable, lesson questions do not provide space for students to justify historical atrocities.
u42 [T1 R8 C1] Lessons Scafof lded for Student Success
u43 [T1 R8 C2] F Source material is accessible, and grade-level appropriate in both Lexile level and length. (Note: Sources may be modifei d and excerpted; however, modifci atoi ns and excerpts retain the original intentoi n of the document.) F Materials utliize appropriate graphic organizers and guiding questoi ns to support student analysis. Scafof lds prompt students to demonstrate cognitoi n about informatoi n utliity. F Materials utliize appropriate social studies instructoi nal strategies to accommodate student learning needs. F Materials can be easily adapted or difef rentai ted to support student learning needs.
u44 [T1 R9 C1] Student Discourse, Voice and Agency
u45 [T1 R9 C2] F Materials promote authentic discourse that enables students to practice disciplinary thinking, reasoning, and reading. F Materials provide students with opportunities to participate in complex collaborative discussions, weighing multiple perspectives and a range of evidence. F Students are supported in becoming responsible for the majority of the cognitive analysis during the course of the lesson.
=== page 3 ===
u46 SUPPLEMENTAL LESSON PLANNING CONVERSATION CHECKLIST:
u47 The checklist above is intended for use by educators in evaluating supplemental curricular opportunities. However, some LEAs may wish to use this checklist to facilitate planning conversations around lesson creation. The supplemental resource below provides support for coaches in supporting educators to develop rigorous learning experiences. This conversation tool is best used in partnership with the social studies walkthrough tool.
u48 [T1 R1 C1] Criterion for Success
u49 [T1 R1 C2] Indicators
u50 [T1 R1 C3] Planning Questions
u51 [T1 R2 C1] Standards Alignment
u52 [T1 R2 C2] • The lesson materials align clearly to both the content and skills expectations articulated by the grade level standards in the OSSE Social Studies Standards.
u53 [T1 R2 C3] • n/a
u54 [T1 R3 C1] Inquiry Focus
u55 [T1 R3 C2] • Lesson materials are structured around a central question that elicits instructional tension between several legitimate civic, historical, economic or geographic perspectives or interpretations. • The central lesson question and the majority of supporting questions necessitate evaluative rather than factual responses. • The lesson question provides opportunities for students to apply a critical lens to the past and/ or present. • The question is accessible, narrow in scope, and answerable using the materials and evidence provided during instruction. • Lesson materials are centered on opportunities for students to evaluate the utility of difef rent sources of information for answering a central question.
u56 [T1 R3 C3] • What are the difef rent possible answers for the central lesson question? • How does each component of the lesson help students engage with the problem space or difef ring interpretations of the central lesson question? • What, if any, changes need to be made to the central lesson question to make it more accessible for students? • Which, if any, components of the lesson do not contribute to the central inquiry?
u57 [T1 R4 C1] Lesson Framing and Contextualization
u58 [T1 R4 C2] • Lesson materials provide students with sufficient background knowledge for interpreting and analyzing the central lesson question. This can be through direct instruction, background readings, or similar didactic lesson materials. • Historical content provided is in service of supporting skill-based, student-centered instruction. • Developing background knowledge facilitates student engagement in critical inquiry and comprises a small component (less than 15 percent) of the learning time.
u59 [T1 R4 C3] • How can you engage students during the lesson framing without unnecessarily prolonging this portion of the lesson? ○ Some examples: Quick “agree/disagree” prompts, student note catchers, initial hypothesizing. • How does each component of your lesson frame contribute to students’ ability to unpack the central lesson question or problem space? • Which parts of the lesson framing can be cut or simplified? • Does the lesson framing support students in understanding necessary background information for engaging in historical, civic or geographic analysis while leaving the majority of the cognitive analysis to students?
=== page 4 ===
u60 [T1 R1 C1] Criterion for Success
u61 [T1 R1 C2] Indicators
u62 [T1 R1 C3] Planning Questions
u63 [T1 R2 C1] Focus on Disciplinary Reading, Thinking, and Reasoning.
u64 [T1 R2 C2] • Students have opportunities to assess the utility and limitations of primary and/or secondary texts through historical thinking skills such as sourcing, corroboration, close reading and/or contextualization of evidence. • Source analysis moves beyond text comprehension and summarizing informational texts into evaluation and analysis of information utility.
u65 [T1 R2 C3] • Where in the lesson are students explicitly asked about the reliability or utility of each piece of evidence? • How does evaluating the reliability of evidence contribute to student learning outcomes? • Which questions will you ask students to assess their understanding of each source’s utility? • Are formative tasks focused on analysis and interpretation rather than summary and/or restating main ideas?
u66 [T1 R3 C2] Source Set Considerations: • Each source should provide additional nuance or a contrasting perspective in evaluating the central lesson question. • Each source should include easily accessible information about the circumstances in which it was created through a headnote or a footnote. ○ Note that this information should move beyond the name of the author and date in which the document was created and should include information about the author and circumstances of creation that can help a student make determinations about reliability.
u67 [T1 R3 C3] • Are there sources that can be shortened or removed without losing historical nuance? • How can we ensure students are atet nding to the sourcing information? • If students are analyzing or annotating source material, are the annotations and analysis focused on critical analysis of the central lesson question? ○ If the source material is providing background information to foreground analysis, how can we ensure students are able to quickly comprehend the material and move quickly into the analysis portion of the learning experience?
u68 [T1 R4 C1] Representation and Historical Agency
u69 [T1 R4 C2] • Students have opportunities to analyze a diversity of perspectives, voices, and narratives when possible. • Individuals within the lesson are represented as having agency in their own decision making and actions, and individuals are presented with dignity. • Students have opportunities to question historical narratives and build their own interpretations of the past and present grounded in valid critical analysis of available information. • Instruction does not promote stereotypes or engage students in harmful learning experiences, including simulations.1 • Materials utilize historically accurate terminology to describe the past. 2 • When applicable, lesson questions do not provide space for students to justify historical atrocities.
u70 [T1 R4 C3] • What connection can students make between the lesson materials and their current context? • How can students engage in productive discourse about whose perspectives are represented and whose perspectives are missing? • Where in the lesson are students provided with the greatest agency over civic, geographic or historical interpretations?
=== page 5 ===
u71 [T1 R1 C1] Criterion for Success
u72 [T1 R1 C2] Indicators
u73 [T1 R1 C3] Planning Questions
u74 [T1 R2 C1] Lessons Scafof lded for Student Success
u75 [T1 R2 C2] • Source material is accessible, and grade-level appropriate in both Lexile level and length. (Note: sources may be modified and excerpted, however modifications and excerpts retain the original intention of the document.) • Materials utilize appropriate graphic organizers and guiding questions to support student analysis. Scafof lds prompt students to demonstrate cognition about information utility. • Materials utilize appropriate social studies instructional strategies to accommodate student learning needs. • Materials can be easily adapted or difef rentiated to support student learning needs.
u76 [T1 R2 C3] • What scafof lds do students need to comprehend the source material available? • Do the sources need to be further modified? • How can you ensure reading comprehension is not a barrier to critical student engagement with the central lesson question? • How can this resource be adapted or difef rentiated for difef rent student needs?
u77 [T1 R3 C1] Student Discourse, Voice, and Agency
u78 [T1 R3 C2] • Materials promote authentic discourse that enables students to practice disciplinary thinking, reasoning, and reading. • Materials provide students with opportunities to participate in complex collaborative discussions, weighing multiple perspectives and a range of evidence. • Students are supported in becoming responsible for the majority of the cognitive analysis during the course of the lesson.
u79 [T1 R3 C3] • What questions can you use to engage students in disciplinary reasoning? • What questions can you use in formative discourse to prompt students to critically evaluate the utility of information? • How will you structure summative discourse? • What questions can you use to scafof ld student discourse around the central lesson question?
=== page 6 ===
u80 REFERENCES
u81 Barringer, W. E., Brand, L., & Kryczka, N. (2023, Sept. 26). No such thing as a bad question? Inquiry-based learning in the history classroom. Perspectives on History. American Historical Association. historians.org/perspectives-article/no-such-thing-as-a-bad-question-inquiry-based- learning-in-the-history-classroom-september-2023/
u82 Coomer, M. N., Skelton, S. M., Kyser, T. S., Thorius, K. A. K., & Warren, C. (2017, February). Assessing Bias in Standards and Curricular Materials (ED623049). Equity Assistance Center Region III, Midwest & Plains Equity Assistance Center. ERIC. files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED623049.pdf
u83 Gross, C., & Imel, K. (2024, Dec. 30). Social studies curriculum review landscape. American Institutes for Research. air.org/resource/report/social- studies-curriculum-review-landscape
u84 Ladson-Billings, G. (1995). But that’s just good teaching! The case for culturally relevant pedagogy. Theory Into Practice, 34(3), 159–165. doi. org/10.1080/00405849509543675
u85 Lee, C., White, G., & Dong, D. (Eds.). (2021). Educating for civic reasoning and discourse. National Academy of Education. naeducation.org/civic- reasoning-and-discourse/
u86 National Council for the Social Studies. (2013). The College, Career, and Civic Life (C3) Framework for Social Studies State Standards: Guidance for enhancing the rigor of K–12 civics, economics, geography, and history. National Council for the Social Studies. socialstudies.org/sites/default/files/ c3/C3-Framework-for-Social-Studies.pdf
u87 National Council for the Social Studies. (2024, September). Position statement on powerful, purposeful teaching and learning in elementary social studies. www.socialstudies.org/position-statements/position-statement-powerful-purposeful-teaching-and-learning-elementary-social
u88 North Carolina Department of Public Instruction. (n.d.). K-12 Social Studies Teaching and Learning “Look Fors”. North Carolina Department of Public Instruction. Retrieved April 30, 2025, from dpi.nc.gov/districts-schools/classroom-resources/academic-standards/standard-course-study/social- studies/professional-learning
u89 Office of the State Superintendent of Education. (2023). DC Social Studies Standards (K–12). District of Columbia Office of the State Superintendent of Education. Retrieved April 30, 2025, from osse.dc.gov/vi/service/dc-standards-learning
u90 Reisman, A., & Fogo, B. (2015). Teaching disciplinary literacy in history classes. In M. Hougen (Ed.), Fundamentals of literacy instruction & assessment, 6–12 (pp. 191–202). Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co.
u91 Santiago, M., & Dozono, T. (2022). History is critical: Addressing the false dichotomy between historical inquiry and criticality. Theory & Research in Social Education, 50(2), 173-195.
u92 VanSledright, B. A. (2004). What does it mean to think historically… and how do you teach it? Social Education, 68(3), 230–233. Retrieved from socialstudies.org/system/files/publications/articles/se_6803230.pdf
u93 Weinberg, S. S. (2001). Historical thinking and other unnatural acts: Charting the future of teaching the past. Temple University Press.
u94 Wineburg, S., & Reisman, A. (2015). Disciplinary literacy in history: A toolkit for digital citizenship. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 58(8), 636–639. doi.org/10.1002/jaal.410
u95 ENDNOTES:
u96 1. Harmful instructional practices refer to practices including role play, simulations, and other instructional practices that trivialize the experiences of historical individuals, distort reality, disconnect historical atrocities from their context or create one- dimensional representations of complex historical moments. For further reading on appropriate curricular choices see below: • Southern Poverty Law Center: Ending Curriculum Violence • Echoes and Reflections: Why Simulation Activities Should Not Be Used 2. Historically Accurate Terminology The following terminology list from the Great Lakes Center for Equity Assessing Bias in Standards and Curricular Materials is not an exhaustive list of appropriate historical terminology, however it may serve as bench mark for discussing this portion of the walkthrough tool. • Curricular materials avoid using language such as “roaming”, “wandering”, or “roving” to describe the travel of the Indigenous People of the United States. • The text avoids using language that suggests groups of people were order-less or uncivilized than Euro-Americans. • The text avoids using language that suggests specific groups of people needing “saving” or “help.” • Standards describes groups of people in such a way as to counter stereotypes, bias, and marginalization.
