=== page 1 ===
u1 Social Studies Instruction Walkthrough Tool
u2 PURPOSE:
u3 This walkthrough tool is intended to facilitate dialogue between educators and administrators and improves classroom instructional practice. This tool focuses on best practices for inquiry-driven instruction in social studies courses and is not intended to be used as an evaluation tool for educators. The walkthrough tool should serve as a support to guide educators, administrators, coaches, and instructional leaders in identifying high-quality social studies instruction and improving implementation of OSSE’s Social Studies Standards. The walkthrough tool below focuses on lesson facilitation specific to social studies practice.
u4 This tool is intended to support continuous cycles of growth for educators through targeted feedback and collaborative reflection. This tool can be used in conjunction with or in lieu of a local education agency’s (LEA’s) existing process for observing and supporting teachers’ instructional development. This tool can also be used to aggregate data and develop professional learning opportunities for educators across LEAs.
u5 (x=331) MULTIPLE
u6 (x=97) ENGAGE STUDENTS AND ESTABLISH
u7 (x=332) SOURCES
u8 (x=230) CENTRAL
u9 (x=461) DISCUSSION
u10 (x=234) LESSON QUESTION
u11 (x=321) DISCIPLINARY
u12 (x=82) BACKGROUND
u13 (x=330) THINKING
u14 (x=85) KNOWLEDGE
u15 (x=340) SKILLS
u16 SUGGESTED STRUCTURE OF A SOCIAL STUDIES LESSON:
u17 The components above may take place over several successive class periods, and each component correlates to some elements of the rubric below. In general, establishing background knowledge connects to the introduction of any learning activity. The Central Lesson Question contributes to the Inquiry focus of the lesson, and the sections of the rubric entitled Focus on Disciplinary Reading, Thinking and Reasoning, Representation and Historical Agency, Lessons Scaffolded for Student Success can be evaluated by considering the source sets or student facing materials included in lesson materials.
u18 This walkthrough tool is intended for use in providing feedback for social studies lessons; however, this is not an exhaustive list for social studies instructional outcomes. Extended projects such as National History Day, Civic Action Projects, and other similar programs that are aligned with the OSSE Social Studies Standards and that support students in building their civic and historical efficacy skills may not be reflected in the rubric below.
u19 Note that the walkthrough tool is most compatible with lessons chosen from curriculum that meet the minimum expectations for High-Quality Instructional Materials in social studies or individual lessons that meet the criteria set forth in the Supplemental Lesson Checklist. Lessons that do not meet the criteria from either tool will not provide educators with opportunities to demonstrate proficiency in social studies pedagogy.
u20 DIRECTIONS:
u21 Prior to the observation, coaches utilize the supplemental lesson checklist to facilitate pre-observation planning conversation. During this time, the instructional leader and the educator should make note of which components of the walkthrough tool the coach will observe during the observation. If a learning experience occurs over multiple class periods, observers may not see all components of the walkthrough tool.
u22 For each observation, coaches should make note of both educator and student behaviors that demonstrate alignment to the criteria in the walkthrough tool. Although many indicators will be observable during the course of a lesson, there may be times when a lesson is appropriately focused on a smaller set of objectives, or the coach observes only one portion of a lesson. In those cases, coaches should expect not to observe some of the indicators and to leave some of the tool blank. If you do not observe a concept during your walkthrough, it is advisable to follow up with the teacher as to why that concept was not included during the instruction.
u23 Following the observation, the coach should identify two to three areas of high-leverage feedback to provide the educator and develop a targeted set of next steps focused on specific areas of growth prior to the subsequent observation.
=== page 2 ===
u24 OBSERVATION TOOL:
u25 [T1 R1 C2] Criterion for Success
u26 [T1 R1 C3] Indicators
u27 [T1 R1 C4] Evidence
u28 [T1 R1 C5] Next Steps
u29 [T1 R2 C2] Inquiry Focus/ Central Lesson Question
u30 [T1 R2 C3] • Educator continually reorients students to the problem space or driving question during the course of the lesson. • Educator makes instructional choices that help students engage in critical analysis and discussion and move beyond the summary of information. • Educator utilizes open-ended question to direct students to evaluate the utility of difef rent sources of information for answering a central question. • Students are supported in doing the majority of the cognitive analysis during the course of the lesson. Note: At the beginning of a lesson, the educator may demonstrate cognitive modeling and gradually release responsibility for cognitive analysis during a lesson. • It is clear to students that their instructional task is to evaluate evidence in response to a central question.
u31 [T1 R3 C2] Lesson Framing and Contextualization
u32 [T1 R3 C3] • Educators provide students with sufcfi ient background knowledge for interpretni g and analyzing the central lesson questoi n. This can be through direct instructoi n, background readings, or similar didactci lesson materials. • Historical content provided is in service of supportni g skill- based, student-centered instructoi n, and does not supplant student-centered inquiry goal as a core learning outcome. • Direct instructoi n supports student development of agency. • The development of appropriate contextual knowledge is proportoi nal to the inquiry task at hand and does not comprise the majority of instructoi nal tmi e.
u33 [T1 R4 C2] Focus on Disciplinary Reading, Thinking, and Reasoning
u34 [T1 R4 C3] • Educators explicitly prompt students to consider how the circumstances in which information was created impact their historical analysis. For example, an educator asks, “Do you think this source is reliable?” or “Why do you think it was created?” • Source analysis moves beyond text comprehension and summarizing informational texts into evaluation and analysis of information utility. • Educator prompts students to build claims using evidence, content knowledge, and source analysis to support their conclusions. • Educator prompts students to analyze how current interpretations of the past are limited by the extent to which available historical sources represent perspectives of people at the time. • Teacher poses disciplinary thinking questions and fosters student discourse through strategies such as turn-and-talk, think-pair-share, etc.
u35 [T1 R5 C2] Representation and Historical Agency
u36 [T1 R5 C3] • Educator consistently prompts students to questoi n historical narratvi es and build their own interpretatoi ns of the past and present grounded in valid critci al analysis of available informatoi n. • Educator supports students in afrfi ming and appreciatni g diverse global experiences and cultures. • Instructoi n does not promote stereotypes or engage students in harmful learning experiences.1
u37 [T1 R6 C1] • Educator utliizes accurate terminology to describe the past.2
u38 [T1 R6 C3] • Educator utliizes accurate terminology to describe the past.2
=== page 3 ===
u39 [T1 R1 C1] Criterion for Success
u40 [T1 R1 C2] Indicators
u41 [T1 R1 C3] Evidence
u42 [T1 R1 C4] Next Steps
u43 [T1 R2 C1] Lessons Scafof lded for Student Success
u44 [T1 R2 C2] • Educator utilizes instructional strategies to evaluate student thinking about the central question as the lesson progresses (i.e., “everyone show me if you agree or disagree with the author” or “take a stand” activities). • Educator utilizes efef ctive strategies for scafof lding student discourse (i.e., think-pair-share, small table discussion prior to large group discussion). • When necessary, educator provides explicit strategy instruction that focuses on demonstrating the thought processes behind disciplinary reasoning and reading (such as sourcing, contextualization, close reading, or corroboration).
u45 [T1 R3 C1] Formative Assessment and Feedback
u46 [T1 R3 C2] • Students are provided with formal and informal feedback on their knowledge of course content and mastery of social studies skills, such as sourcing, contextualization, corroboration, and close reading. • Teacher feedback continually orients students to the problem space and purpose for analysis.
u47 [T1 R4 C1] Student Discourse, Voice and Agency
u48 [T1 R4 C2] • During whole class discussion, the educator supports student discourse by directing students to support claims with evidence, stabilizing content knowledge, revoicing student comments, and exposing the debate structure as necessary. • Students have opportunities to participate in complex collaborative discussions, weighing multiple perspectives and a range of evidence.
=== page 4 ===
u49 REFERENCES
u50 Barringer, W. E., Brand, L., & Kryczka, N. (2023, September 26). No such thing as a bad question? Inquiry-based learning in the history classroom. Perspectives on History. American Historical Association. historians.org/perspectives-article/no-such-thing-as-a-bad-question-inquiry-based-learn- ing-in-the-history-classroom-september-2023/
u51 Coomer, M. N., Skelton, S. M., Kyser, T. S., Thorius, K. A. K., & Warren, C. (2017, February). Assessing Bias in Standards and Curricular Materials (ED623049). Equity Assistance Center Region III, Midwest & Plains Equity Assistance Center. ERIC. files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED623049.pdf
u52 Gross, C., & Imel, K. (2024, December 30). Social studies curriculum review landscape. American Institutes for Research. .air.org/resource/report/social-studies-curriculum-review-landscape
u53 Ladson-Billings, G. (1995). But that’s just good teaching! The case for culturally relevant pedagogy. Theory Into Practice, 34(3), 159–165. doi. org/10.1080/00405849509543675
u54 Lee, C., White, G., & Dong, D. (Eds.). (2021). Educating for civic reasoning and discourse. National Academy of Education. naeducation.org/civic-rea- soning-and-discourse/
u55 National Council for the Social Studies. (2013). The College, Career, and Civic Life (C3) Framework for Social Studies State Standards: Guidance for enhancing the rigor of K–12 civics, economics, geography, and history. National Council for the Social Studies. socialstudies.org/sites/default/files/c3/C3-Framework-for-Social-Studies.pdf
u56 National Council for the Social Studies. (2024, September). Position statement on powerful, purposeful teaching and learning in elementary social studies. socialstudies.org/position-statements/position-statement-powerful-purposeful-teaching-and-learning-elementary-social
u57 North Carolina Department of Public Instruction. (n.d.). K-12 Social Studies Teaching and Learning “Look Fors”. North Carolina Department of Public Instruction. Retrieved April 30, 2025, fromdpi.nc.gov/districts-schools/classroom-resources/academic-standards/standard-course-study/social-stud- ies/professional-learning
u58 Office of the State Superintendent of Education. (2023). DC Social Studies Standards (K–12). District of Columbia Office of the State Superintendent of Education. Retrieved April 30, 2025, from osse.dc.gov/vi/service/dc-standards-learning
u59 Reisman, A., & Fogo, B. (2015). Teaching disciplinary literacy in history classes. In M. Hougen (Ed.), Fundamentals of literacy instruction & assess- ment, 6–12 (pp. 191–202). Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co.
u60 Santiago, M., & Dozono, T. (2022). History is critical: Addressing the false dichotomy between historical inquiry and criticality. Theory & Research in Social Education, 50(2), 173-195.
u61 VanSledright, B. A. (2004). What does it mean to think historically… and how do you teach it? Social Education, 68(3), 230–233. Retrieved from socialstudies.org/system/files/publications/articles/se_6803230.pdf
u62 Wineburg, S., & Martin, D. (2009, September). Tampering with history: Adapting primary sources for struggling readers. Social Education, 73(5), 212–216. socialstudies.org/social-education/73/5/tampering-history-adapting-primary-sources-struggling-readers
u63 Weinberg, S. S. (2001). Historical thinking and other unnatural acts: Charting the future of teaching the past. Temple University Press.
u64 Wineburg, S., & Reisman, A. (2015). Disciplinary literacy in history: A toolkit for digital citizenship. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 58(8), 636–639. doi.org/10.1002/jaal.410
u65 ENDNOTES
u66 1. Harmful instructional practices refer to practices including role play, simulations, and other instructional practices that trivialize the experiences of historical individuals, distort reality, disconnect historical atrocities from their context or create one-dimensional representations of complex historical moments.
u67 For further reading on appropriate curricular choices see below:
u68 • Southern Poverty Law Center: Ending Curriculum Violence
u69 • Echoes and Reflections: Why Simulation Activities Should Not Be Used
u70 2. Historically Accurate Terminology
u71 The following terminology list from the Great Lakes Center for Equity Assessing Bias in Standards and Curricular Materials is not an exhaustive list of appropriate historical terminology, however it may serve as bench mark for discussing this portion of the walkthrough tool.
u72 • Curricular materials avoid using language such as “roaming”, “wandering”, or “roving” to describe the travel of the Indigenous People of the United States.
u73 • The text avoids using language that suggests groups of people were order-less or uncivilized than Euro-Americans.
u74 • The text avoids using language that suggests specific groups of people needing “saving” or “help.”
u75 • Standards describes groups of people in such a way as to counter stereotypes, bias, and marginalization.
