u1 History and Social Science
u2 Standards of
u3 Learning
u4 for
u5 [Heading 1] Virginia
u6 Public Schools
u7 April 2023
u8 Board of Education
u9 Commonwealth of Virginia
u10 History and Social Science
u11 Standards of
u12 Learning
u13 for
u14 Virginia
u15 [Heading 7] Public Schools
u16 Adopted in April 2023 by the
u17 Board of Education
u18 Daniel A. Gecker, President
u19 Dr. Tammy Mann, Vice President
u20 Grace Turner Creasey, M. Ed.
u21 Pamela Davis-Vaught
u22 Bill Hansen
u23 Anne B. Holton
u24 Andy Rotherham
u25 Dr. H. Alan Seibert
u26 Dale Sturdifen
u27 Superintendent of Public Instruction
u28 Dr. Lisa Coons
u29 Commonwealth of Virginia
u30 Board of Education
u31 Post Office Box 2120
u32 Richmond, VA 23218-2120
u33 Copyright © 2023
u34 by the
u35 Virginia Department of Education
u36 P. O. Box 2120
u37 Richmond, Virginia 23218-2120
u38 Virginia Department of Education
u39 All rights reserved. Reproduction of these materials for instructional purposes in public school classrooms in Virginia is permitted.
u40 Statement of Non-Discrimination The Virginia Department of Education does not discriminate on the basis of race, sex, color, national origin, religion, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, political affiliation, or against otherwise qualified persons with disabilities. The policy permits appropriate employment preferences for veterans and specifically prohibits discrimination against veterans.
u41 [Heading 3] Table of Contents
u42 Guiding Principles 4
u43 Implementation of Virginia’s History and Social Science Standards 6
u44 Background and Context for the History and Social Science Standards Revisions 7
u45 Kindergarten: Community 10
u46 Grade 1: Commonwealth of Virginia 12
u47 Grade 2: United States of America 15
u48 Grade 3: The World 18
u49 Grade 4: Virginia Studies 21
u50 Grade 5: United States History to 1865 25
u51 Grade 6: United States History: 1865 to the Present 28
u52 Grade 7: Civics and Economics 33
u53 Grade 8: World Geography 38
u54 Grade 9: World History and Geography to 1500 A.D. 42
u55 Grade 10: World History and Geography: 1500 A.D. to the Present 47
u56 Grade 11: Virginia and United States History 52
u57 Grade 12: Virginia and United States Government 59
u58 [Heading 2] Guiding Principles
u59 [Heading 3] Introduction
u60 Virginia’s History and Social Science Standards of Learning aim to raise our aspirations for history and social science instruction and restore excellence, curiosity, and excitement around teaching and learning history. The teaching of history should illuminate insights from the past and inspire current and future generations to lead lives that are informed and inspired by those who walked this journey before them.
u61 [Heading 3] Expectations For Virginia’s Students
u62 Every graduate from Virginia’s K–12 schools will possess a robust understanding of the places, people, events, and ideas that comprise the history of Virginia, the United States, and the world. Our students will learn from the rise and fall of civilizations across time, so that we may pursue and maintain government and economic systems that have led to human achievement. The Virginia standards are grounded in the foundational principles and actions of individuals and institutions so that we may learn from them as we strive to maintain our political liberties and personal freedoms and thrive as a nation.
u63 The United States, whose founding history is rooted in Virginia’s history, has led the world in political, social, and economic thought and action in ways that fundamentally changed the interactions and expectations of individual citizens with government. Students will know that the Declaration of Independence first stated that “all men are created equal, and that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.” The standards will recognize the world impact of America’s ongoing quest for a “more perfect Union” and the optimism, ideals, and imagery captured by Ronald Reagan’s “shining city upon a hill” speech, Abraham Lincoln’s second inaugural address, and Frederick Douglas’ complicated love for America. Students will know our nation’s exceptional strengths, including individual innovation, moral character, ingenuity, and adventure, while learning from terrible periods and actions in direct conflict with these ideals.
u64 Our students will also understand that our history encompasses a broad civilization beyond their neighborhood, Virginia, and the United States. They will learn that humankind has spanned continents, ethnicities, and religions, with common qualities that unite us and differences that enrich our society. The events of our history demonstrate that people have incredible ability to inspire, innovate, and improve lives, and this human story also shows that evil exists, and people are capable of destroying civilizations, communities, and individual lives.
u65 The standards provide an unflinching and fact-based coverage of world, United States, and Virginia history. Students will study the horrors of wars and genocide, including the Holocaust and the ethnic cleansing campaigns that have occurred throughout history and continue today. They will better understand the abhorrent treatment of Indigenous peoples, the indelible stain of slavery, segregation, and racism in the United States and around the world, and the inhumanity and deprivations of totalitarian and communist regimes. Students also will study inspirational moments, including the achievements of Asian, African, Greek, and Roman governments and advancements in engineering, architecture, and art, the European Enlightenment, the American Revolution, the triumph of America’s Greatest Generation in World War II, the Marshall Plan, the Civil Rights Movement, the fall of the Berlin Wall, Project Apollo, progress against diseases, and the heroic sacrifice of Flight 93 passengers.
u66 Students will have an in-depth understanding of the good and the bad in world, United States, and Virginia history. The standards will include an appreciation of the attributes and actions that have made America the world’s exemplar of freedom, opportunity, and democratic ideals. This comprehensive story of Virginia, the United States, and the world will prepare every student for the rights, opportunities, and responsibilities of Americans. As noted by George Santayana over 100 years ago, “those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.”
u67 [Heading 3] Principles
u68 The foundational principles for these History and Social Sciences learning standards include:
u69 Individual liberty and representative government are cornerstones of the American way of life.
u70 The Declaration of Independence and the Constitution are remarkable documents that provide the freedoms and framework for our constitutional republic.
u71 We aspire to live up to the ideals expressed but not fully realized by the Founders for a society that recognizes that all individuals are created equal.
u72 From thirteen diverse colonies to a unified nation, “E Pluribus Unum” (“Out of Many, One”) has always been our strength. Immigrants from around the world continue to come to the United States seeking freedom and opportunity to build a better life and have contributed to our communities and added to the rich history of the United States.
u73 Free enterprise, property rights, and the rule of law enable an economic system that allocates assets through free markets and competition and fosters innovation, opportunity, and efficiency.
u74 Centralized government planning in the form of socialism or communist political systems, as well as fascism, totalitarianism, and other forms of government that preference state power or control over individual liberty and consent of the governed, are incompatible with democracy.
u75 America is both exceptional and imperfect.
u76 The rights codified in the United States and Virginia constitutions and the Bill of Rights provide for individual freedoms that place a responsibility on current and future generations of Americans to engage in the political process with civility and fulfill their civic obligations.
u77 Through the ages, civilizations have grown, prospered, and vanished. Every student should understand our Great American Experiment is not guaranteed forever. As Benjamin Franklin warned citizens over 200 years ago, “a republic, if you can keep it.”
u78 [Heading 2] Implementation of Virginia’s History and Social Science Standards
u79 Human history is complex and evolving as new technologies emerge and old stories are uncovered. We update our standards every seven years, because we continue to learn more about the multiple facets of historic events through new discoveries and expanded research.
u80 The virtues and flaws of Virginia, the United States, and other world civilizations will be taught in an objective, factual, and age-appropriate way by balancing fact and inquiry-based learning opportunities. These standards lay out the achievements and progress of our story and where Americans and Virginians have fallen short. Virginia’s history and social science education will highlight our shared humanity and the opportunity to work together in our constitutional republic to improve our own lives as well as the lives of our families and communities. The study of history and civics through these standards will provide the foundation for students to be engaged and deeply informed citizens who will continue to strengthen our communities, our economy, and our republic.
u81 The success of Virginia’s 2023 History and Social Science standards depends on the sound judgment and strong preparation of teachers and informed engagement by parents and communities. The standards and state-developed curriculum frameworks will serve as guides for best-in-class teaching and learning. While the immense responsibility of defining curriculum and texts used in classrooms across Virginia rests with local school boards, these standards should be implemented in the following ways:
u82 Students should be exposed to the facts of our past in a content-rich and engaging way, even when those facts are uncomfortable.
u83 Teachers, whether they are new to the profession or are veteran educators, should utilize these standards in their classrooms as a mechanism to support their content knowledge and the important work they do each day in classrooms as they teach students across the Commonwealth.
u84 Every local school board has the responsibility to select and fully implement curricula that are aligned with the core History and Social Science standards for every grade level and course.
u85 The curriculum selected by local school boards should provide a level of guidance, consistency, high quality instructional materials, and professional development so that teachers, especially less experienced teachers, are not required to develop materials on their own.
u86 The Virginia Department of Education will provide our teachers with excellent instructional tools and training so they will be able to teach all of our history in an objective, fair, empathetic, nonjudgmental, and developmentally appropriate manner in accordance with Title IV and Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
u87 Teachers must facilitate open and balanced discussions on difficult topics, including discrimination and racism, and present learning opportunities without personal or political bias.
u88 Teachers should engage students in fact-based, non-ideological, and age-appropriate ways that do not imply students today are culpable for past events. Teachers should not expose students to embarrassment or disparagement or restrict student access to varying points of view.
u89 Teachers, students, and parents should insist on dignity and respect for each other as part of civil society.
u90 Parents should have access to all instructional materials utilized in any Virginia public school. Division policies and practices should reflect this commitment.
u91 [Heading 2] Background and Context for the History and Social Science Standards Revisions
u92 In 1995, the Virginia Board of Education published Standards of Learning in English, mathematics, science, and history and social science for kindergarten through grade 12. Subsequently, Standards of Learning were developed for all academic content areas. The Standards of Learning are designed to raise the academic achievement for all students in Virginia by providing clear and specific benchmarks at each grade level about what students should know and be able to do.
u93 Pursuant to legislation from the 2000 Virginia General Assembly, the Virginia Board of Education established a seven-year cycle for review of the Standards of Learning. Thus, the 1995 History and Social Science Standards of Learning were reviewed in 2001, 2008, and 2015. The Virginia Department of Education convened review committees in 2021–2022 to review and revise the 2015 History and Social Science Standards of Learning. The feedback of the committees, exceptional work by department staff, and extensive public comment are reflected in these standards.
u94 Curriculum, on the other hand, created at the division or local level, should prescribe a specific sequence of coherent units or modules that combine instructional strategies with resources and a sequence of student activities to help students meet the standards. A locally developed curriculum should specify how resources, instructional strategies, content vocabulary, student activities, formative and summative assessments, and evaluation procedures may be combined into those coherent units.
u95 To assist school divisions with the creation of the local curricula, the Virginia Department of Education will separately issue Curriculum Frameworks for the History and Social Science Standards of Learning. The Curriculum Frameworks will suggest instructional resources (print and non-print), student activities, formative and summative assessment and evaluation materials, and pacing. They will also include scaffolding and differentiation suggestions to help curriculum developers address the needs of struggling learners and those who need challenges. The Curriculum Frameworks will offer important instructional guidance to ensure that students are learning and applying the skills of historical analysis, such as being an active listener, looking at events and issues from various perspectives, analyzing primary and secondary sources, evaluating, and developing arguments, and citing evidence in support of one’s opinion both orally and in writing. Finally, the suggested student activities will encourage students to wrestle with complex texts and ideas, including the important and transcendent themes associated with the study of history, such as liberty, democracy, self-government, truth, and citizenship. In short, Curriculum Frameworks will be issued to further enrich and clarify the concepts set forth in the History and Social Science Standards of Learning.
u96 [Heading 3] Organization and Prescribed Order of History and Social Science Courses
u97 Historically, Virginia has offered flexibility around the grades at which some of these courses are taught; in this configuration, the standards are presented in the Board of Education’s recommended grade level sequence. School divisions are strongly encouraged to adopt this sequence, but it is not required. Local school boards that authorize alternative approaches must ensure that gaps in student learning are avoided, make accommodations for students who transfer from other divisions, and ensure that students satisfy Board-prescribed graduation requirements.
u98 [Heading 3] Skills
u99 Preceding the standards at each grade level is a skills standard. The development of these skills at each grade level is important as students develop academically in all content areas. The skills will not be assessed in isolation; rather, they will be assessed as part of the content in the History and Social Science Standards of Learning.
u100 [Heading 4] Grades K–3
u101 Standards are organized into the four core strands of social studies: history, geography, civics, and economics.
u102 The history strand offers opportunities for students to read, hear, learn about, research, and explore the lives of people and events in the local community, Virginia, the United States, and the world.
u103 The geography strand entails the study of both basic geographic skills and specific geography standards that align with and enhance students’ understanding of the history taught at each grade.
u104 The civics strand builds students’ knowledge of citizenship, patriotism, and the establishment of the Constitution of the United States. The strand includes specific expectations for students’ knowledge of how the U.S. government is structured (i.e., the three branches of government) and confirms a nascent understanding of the basic rights and responsibilities of U.S. citizenship.
u105 In the economics strand, students in grades K–3 acquire an understanding of the most basic principles of economics on which the grades 6–12 standards will build.
u106 Additionally, the students in grades K–3 are introduced to basic history and social science skills.
u107 Kindergarteners learn about their community and focus on patriotism, citizenship, and history.
u108 First graders learn about the Commonwealth of Virginia through the lives of changemakers and events in Virginia history. They also learn more about patriotism, civics, and citizenship, develop map skills, and explore basic economic concepts.
u109 Second graders are introduced to U.S. history through the lives of changemakers and events. They focus on civics education, with an introduction to key aspects of the U.S. constitutional democracy, and learn more about citizenship, patriotism, geography, and economics.
u110 Third graders study the world by learning about ancient China, Egypt, Rome, Greece, and Mali. They also continue to develop skills and knowledge about maps, civics, and economics.
u111 [Heading 4] Grades 4–6
u112 Grade 4: Virginia Studies, chronological story of the history of Virginia
u113 Grade 5: United States History to 1865, America’s history from its earliest days to the Civil War
u114 Grade 6: United States History 1865 to the Present, the story of the United States from the Civil War to the present
u115 [Heading 4] Grades 7–8
u116 Students refocus their attention on three strands of social studies content in preparation for a more in-depth look at world and American history in grades 9– 2.
u117 Grade 7: Civics and Economics
u118 Grade 8: World Geography
u119 [Heading 4] Grades 9–12
u120 Students trace closely the causes, course of events, and effects of the most essential aspects of world and American history, culminating in one last immersion in U.S. government, solidifying students’ knowledge of the rights and obligations of U.S. citizenship.
u121 Grade 9: World History to 1500 A.D.
u122 Grade 10: World History 1500 A.D. to the Present
u123 Grade 11: Virginia and United States History
u124 Grade 12: Virginia and United States Government
u125 [Heading 2] Kindergarten: Community
u126 The standards for kindergarten students focus on the local community and include an introduction to basic history and social science skills. During their first year in school, students should learn about their community, including basic concepts related to history, patriotism, national symbols, good citizenship, geographic location, economics, and the importance of following rules and respecting the rights and property of other people.
u127 [Heading 3] Skills
u128 [Heading 4] Skills K The student will apply history and social science skills to the content by
u129 viewing and exploring information sources including, but not limited to artifacts, primary and secondary sources, charts, graphs, and diagrams;
u130 applying geographic skills to identify and understand geographic features;
u131 demonstrating curiosity and critical thinking through questioning;
u132 sequencing and organizing information;
u133 identifying similarities and differences to explain content;
u134 recognizing cause-and-effect relationships;
u135 using economic decision-making models to make informed economic decisions;
u136 practicing civility, respect, hard work, and responsible citizenship skills; and
u137 using content vocabulary to demonstrate comprehension.
u138 [Heading 3] Civics
u139 [Heading 4] K.1 The student will apply history and social science skills to practice citizenship in the classroom by
u140 taking responsibility for one’s actions;
u141 practicing honesty and showing kindness to oneself and others;
u142 recognizing the purpose of rules and practicing self-control;
u143 caring for one’s personal property and respecting other students’ property; and
u144 taking turns, sharing, and working well with others for the good of everyone.
u145 [Heading 4] K.2 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain how communities honor state and national traditions and recognize designated Virginia holidays including, but not limited to
u146 Labor Day;
u147 Columbus Day (also known as Indigenous Peoples’ Day*) and Yorktown Victory Day;
u148 Election Day;
u149 Veterans Day;
u150 Thanksgiving Day;
u151 Christmas Day;
u152 New Year’s Day;
u153 Martin Luther King, Jr. Day;
u154 George Washington Day (commonly known as Presidents’ Day);
u155 Memorial Day;
u156 Juneteenth; and
u157 Independence Day.
u158 *Technical edit to reflect Board of Education Work Session discussion April 19, 2023 and Final Approval of Item G at the Business Meeting April 20, 2023.
u159 [Heading 4] K.3 The student will apply history and social science skills to define patriotism and explain how communities express patriotism by
u160 identifying the American and Virginia flags;
u161 identifying national and state symbols including, but not limited to the bald eagle, the dogwood, and the cardinal;
u162 recognizing the Pledge of Allegiance and the national anthem; and
u163 identifying the current president and explaining that the president is the leader of the United States and is elected by voters.
u164 [Heading 3] History
u165 [Heading 4] K.4 The student will apply history and social science skills to recognize Virginia’s earliest communities by
u166 identifying examples of historic events, stories, and legends;
u167 identifying early communities, changemakers, and contributions of leaders including, but not limited to Indigenous tribes, farmers, traders, early settlers, minorities, women, and children;
u168 recognizing that places change over time; and
u169 identifying people who helped establish and lead the local community over time.
u170 [Heading 4] K.5 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand and explain what makes communities unique by
u171 explaining the roles of important local community members, such as, but not limited to medical personnel, first responders, teachers, and business leaders;
u172 identifying historic events; and
u173 telling the stories of the people that developed their local communities.
u174 [Heading 3] Geography
u175 [Heading 4] K.6 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the relative location of people, places, and objects by using positional words including, but not limited to near/far, over/under, above/below, left/right, behind/in front, next to, and between.
u176 [Heading 4] K.7 The student will apply history and social science skills to demonstrate an understanding of maps and globes by
u177 identifying the similarities and differences between a map and a globe;
u178 identifying basic map symbols;
u179 identifying land and bodies of water in the local community; and
u180 identifying the geographic location of the United States and Virginia on a map and globe.
u181 [Heading 3] Economics
u182 [Heading 4] K.8 The student will apply history and social science skills to demonstrate an understanding of primary economic principles by
u183 describing ways people work to earn and save money to buy the things they need and want; and
u184 recognizing that Americans are free to make choices about what to buy and that they must make choices because they cannot have everything they want.
u185 [Heading 2] Grade 1: Commonwealth of Virginia
u186 The standards for first-grade students include an introduction to the lives of leaders in the history of Virginia and their contributions to the Commonwealth. Students should develop basic map skills. They should study the economic concepts of goods and services, consumers and producers, and economic choices. Students should learn to apply the traits of a responsible citizen and recognize that communities in Virginia have local governments. They should learn that communities include people who have diverse ethnic origins, customs, and traditions, who make contributions to their communities, and who are united as Americans by common principles.
u187 [Heading 3] Skills
u188 [Heading 4] Skills 1 The student will apply history and social science skills to the content by
u189 viewing and exploring information sources including, but not limited to artifacts, primary and secondary sources, charts, graphs, and diagrams;
u190 applying geographic skills to identify and understand geographic features;
u191 demonstrating curiosity and critical thinking through questioning;
u192 sequencing and organizing information;
u193 identifying similarities and differences to clarify and explain content;
u194 recognizing cause-and-effect relationships;
u195 using economic decision-making models to make informed economic decisions;
u196 practicing civility, respect, hard work, and responsible citizenship skills; and
u197 using content vocabulary to demonstrate comprehension.
u198 [Heading 3] Civics
u199 [Heading 4] 1.1 The student will apply history and social science skills to practice citizenship in the classroom by
u200 practicing honesty and showing kindness to oneself and others;
u201 recognizing the purpose of rules and practicing self-control;
u202 being respectful of others and celebrating differences in ethnic origins, customs, and traditions;
u203 working respectfully with one another to achieve a goal;
u204 contributing one’s time and talents to help others in their homes, schools, and communities through jobs;
u205 participating in classroom decision-making by voting; and
u206 understanding that local and state government representatives are elected by citizens who vote.
u207 [Heading 4] 1.2 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain how communities honor local and national traditions and recognize designated Virginia holidays including, but not limited to
u208 Labor Day;
u209 Columbus Day (also known as Indigenous Peoples’ Day*) and Yorktown Victory Day;
u210 Election Day;
u211 Veterans Day;
u212 Thanksgiving Day;
u213 Christmas Day;
u214 New Year’s Day;
u215 Martin Luther King, Jr. Day;
u216 George Washington Day (commonly known as Presidents’ Day);
u217 Memorial Day;
u218 Juneteenth; and
u219 Independence Day.
u220 *Technical edit to reflect Board of Education Work Session discussion April 19, 2023 and Final Approval of Item G at the Business Meeting April 20, 2023.
u221 [Heading 4] 1.3 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the symbols and traditions that honor and foster patriotism in the United States by
u222 learning the Pledge of Allegiance and the national anthem and the ways people express respect for the American flag;
u223 explaining the symbolism of the colors, stars, and stripes of the American flag;
u224 identifying the Virginia flag, state capitol building, the cardinal as the state bird, and the dogwood as the state flower; and
u225 explaining why people use symbols and have traditions.
u226 [Heading 3] History
u227 [Heading 4] 1.4 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand Virginia’s history by
u228 identifying and describing important events and locations throughout the early history of the Commonwealth including, but not limited to Werowocomoco and the first English colony in North America at Jamestown;
u229 describing how life in various Virginia communities has changed over time; and
u230 identifying local cities or counties on a map of Virginia.
u231 [Heading 4] 1.5 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe contributions of Virginia’s diverse people and the stories of changemakers in the history of Virginia and their contributions to our Commonwealth including, but not limited to
u232 Indigenous people: Chief Powhatan and Pocahontas;
u233 Explorers: John Smith and Christopher Newport;
u234 Presidents: George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and James Monroe; and
u235 Barrier breakers: John Mercer Langston, Booker T. Washington, Maggie L. Walker, Barbara Johns, Arthur R. Ashe, Jr., and L. Douglas Wilder.
u236 [Heading 3] Geography
u237 [Heading 4] 1.6 The student will apply history and social science skills to develop geographic skills by
u238 using basic map symbols, including references to land, water, cities, and roads;
u239 using cardinal directions on maps;
u240 locating Virginia, the United States, continents, and oceans on maps and globes; and
u241 constructing simple maps and including a title, map legend or key, and a compass rose.
u242 [Heading 4] 1.7 The student will apply history and social science skills to connect geography to historic events of Virginia and the United States by
u243 identifying landforms and bodies of water of Virginia and describing how they affect the way people live;
u244 understanding that the location of Virginia determines its climate and its four distinct seasons;
u245 locating the site of the Jamestown colony; and
u246 locating Richmond and Washington, D.C. on Virginia and United States maps.
u247 [Heading 3] Economics
u248 [Heading 4] 1.8 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain how individuals make economic choices to meet their basic needs by
u249 identifying the difference between goods and services;
u250 describing how people can be both consumers and producers;
u251 describing ways people work to earn and save money to purchase goods and services;
u252 describing goods produced and services provided in Virginia; and
u253 describing why people must make choices, prioritizing needs over wants.
u254 [Heading 2] Grade 2: United States of America
u255 The standards for second-grade students include an introduction to the lives of Americans and their contributions to the United States, as well as the heritage of Indigenous people. Students should continue developing map skills and demonstrate an understanding of basic economic concepts. The students will identify the contributions of individuals who have worked to improve the lives of American citizens. The students will recognize that the United States is a land of people who have diverse ethnic origins, customs, and traditions, who make contributions to their communities, and who are united as Americans by common principles.
u256 [Heading 3] Skills
u257 [Heading 4] Skills 2 The student will apply history and social science skills to the content by
u258 viewing and exploring information sources including, but not limited to artifacts, primary and secondary sources, charts, graphs, and diagrams;
u259 applying geographic skills to identify and understand geographic features and connections;
u260 demonstrating curiosity and critical thinking through questioning and drawing conclusions;
u261 sequencing and organizing information;
u262 identifying similarities and differences to clarify and explain content;
u263 recognizing cause-and-effect relationships;
u264 using economic decision-making models to make informed economic decisions;
u265 practicing civility, respect, hard work, honesty, trustworthiness, and responsible citizenship skills; and
u266 using content vocabulary to demonstrate comprehension.
u267 [Heading 3] Civics
u268 [Heading 4] 2.1 The student will apply history and social science skills to distinguish between the rights and responsibilities that individuals have in the United States including, but not limited to
u269 exercising freedom of expression;
u270 exercising freedom of religion;
u271 understanding equal protection;
u272 voting for local, state, and national representatives;
u273 respecting and following laws;
u274 practicing honesty and trustworthiness; and
u275 respecting the rights, beliefs, and opinions of others.
u276 [Heading 4] 2.2 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand citizenship by
u277 identifying the benefits of being a U.S. citizen; and
u278 identifying the responsibilities of being a U.S. citizen.
u279 [Heading 4] 2.3 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain how communities honor local and national traditions and recognize designated Virginia holidays including, but not limited to
u280 Labor Day;
u281 Columbus Day (also known as Indigenous Peoples’ Day*) and Yorktown Victory Day;
u282 Election Day;
u283 Veterans Day;
u284 Thanksgiving Day;
u285 Christmas Day;
u286 New Year’s Day;
u287 Martin Luther King, Jr. Day;
u288 George Washington Day (commonly known as Presidents’ Day);
u289 Memorial Day;
u290 Juneteenth; and
u291 Independence Day.
u292 *Technical edit to reflect Board of Education Work Session discussion April 19, 2023 and Final Approval of Item G at the Business Meeting April 20, 2023.
u293 [Heading 4] 2.4 The student will apply history and social science skills to recognize state and national symbols including, but not limited to
u294 locating the Virginia and United States capitals and capitol buildings;
u295 explaining the meaning behind symbols including, but not limited to the American flag, bald eagle, Washington Monument, Liberty Bell, and Statue of Liberty; and
u296 learning about the meaning of the American flag and the words chosen in the Pledge of Allegiance and the national anthem.
u297 [Heading 3] History
u298 [Heading 4] 2.5 The student will use history and social science skills to identify the geographic location, use of resources, and contributions of Indigenous people past and present, including
u299 Indigenous nations and tribes of the Eastern Woodlands;
u300 Indigenous nations and tribes of the Plains;
u301 Indigenous nations and tribes of the Southwest; and
u302 understanding tribal sovereignty, and the importance of land, history, and culture.
u303 [Heading 4] 2.6 The student will use history and social science skills to identify the geographic location, use of resources, and contributions of European explorers, and their influence on the development of North America including, but not limited to the English, French, and Spanish.
u304 [Heading 4] 2.7 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the revolutionaries who fought for America’s freedom (1764–1781) including, but not limited to
u305 John Adams;
u306 Benjamin Franklin;
u307 Alexander Hamilton;
u308 Patrick Henry;
u309 Thomas Jefferson;
u310 James Madison (known as the “Father of the Constitution”);
u311 Paul Revere; and
u312 George Washington (known as the “Father of our Country”).
u313 [Heading 4] 2.8 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the principles of American democracy and relate them to the founding of the nation by
u314 identifying reasons for the settlement of the thirteen colonies;
u315 explaining the relationships between the colonies and Great Britain; and
u316 identifying key components of the Declaration of Independence.
u317 [Heading 4] 2.9 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand key events in United States history including, but not limited to
u318 recognizing the reasons for moving the nation’s capital from Philadelphia to Washington, D.C. and the importance of the nation’s capital; and
u319 describing the impact of the Louisiana Purchase on the westward expansion of the United States.
u320 [Heading 4] 2.10 The student will describe the contributions and roles of changemakers in United States history including, but not limited to
u321 Scholars and Inventors: Benjamin Franklin, Benjamin Banneker, Thomas Jefferson, George Washington Carver, Booker T. Washington, Orville and Wilbur Wright, Steve Jobs, Jonas Salk, Thomas Edison, Alexander Graham Bell, and Mary Jackson;
u322 Explorers and Adventurers: Meriwether Lewis, William Clark, Sacagawea, Neil Armstrong, and Amelia Earhart;
u323 Reformers and Champions: Abraham Lincoln, Theodore Roosevelt, Helen Keller, Thurgood Marshall, Rosa Parks, Jackie Robinson, Cesar Chavez, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Sen. Daniel Inouye, John F. Kennedy, and Barack Obama.
u324 [Heading 3] Geography
u325 [Heading 4] 2.11 The student will apply history and social science skills to develop geographic mapping skills using world maps and globes by
u326 locating the countries of North America and the bordering oceans;
u327 identifying major rivers, mountain ranges, lakes, and other physical features in the United States.
u328 [Heading 4] 2.12 The student will apply history and social science skills to connect geography to landmarks and historic events including, but not limited to
u329 the Jefferson Memorial and the Lincoln Memorial;
u330 Valley Forge and George Washington’s crossing of the Delaware River; and
u331 Yellowstone National Park.
u332 [Heading 3] Economics
u333 [Heading 4] 2.13 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand basic economic principles by
u334 identifying natural resources (e.g., water, soil, wood, coal), human resources (i.e., people at work), and capital resources (e.g., machines, tools, computers, buildings);
u335 distinguishing between needs and wants;
u336 distinguishing between the use of barter and the use of money in the exchange for goods and services and describing how money makes trading easier than barter; and
u337 explaining that scarcity (having limited resources) requires people to make choices about producing and consuming goods and services.
u338 [Heading 2] Grade 3: The World
u339 The standards for third-grade students include an introduction to the heritage and contributions of the peoples of ancient China, Egypt, Greece, Rome, and the West African empire of Mali. Students should continue developing map skills and demonstrate an understanding of basic economic and civics concepts. Students will examine the social, cultural, and political characteristics of major ancient world cultures. Students will recognize that many aspects of ancient cultures served as the foundation for modern governments, technologies, customs, traditions, and perspectives.
u340 [Heading 3] Skills
u341 [Heading 4] Skills 3 The student will apply history and social science skills to the content by
u342 analyzing and interpreting information sources including, but not limited to artifacts, primary and secondary sources, charts, graphs, and diagrams;
u343 applying geographic skills to identify and understand geographic features and connections;
u344 developing questions, demonstrating curiosity, and engaging in critical thinking and analysis;
u345 using evidence to construct timelines, classify events, and distinguish fact from opinion;
u346 comparing and contrasting people, places, and events;
u347 identifying cause-and-effect relationships to clarify and explain content;
u348 using economic decision-making models to make informed economic decisions;
u349 practicing civility, respect, hard work, honesty, trustworthiness, and responsible citizenship skills; and
u350 using content vocabulary to demonstrate learning through oral and written products.
u351 [Heading 3] Civics
u352 [Heading 4] 3.1 The student will apply history and social science skills to define citizenship and explain the rights and responsibilities of United States citizenship by
u353 recognizing that Americans are people of diverse ethnic origins, customs, and traditions that are united by the basic principles of a republican form of government and respect for individual rights and freedoms;
u354 describing the rights guaranteed to citizens in the First Amendment;
u355 understanding the importance of supporting and defending the Constitution of the United States and the Bill of Rights;
u356 respecting and following local, state, and federal laws;
u357 taking part in the voting process when making classroom decisions;
u358 running for elected office;
u359 serving on a jury;
u360 paying local, state, and federal taxes;
u361 describing the purpose of rules; and
u362 understanding responsible digital citizenship.
u363 [Heading 3] Geography
u364 [Heading 4] 3.2 The student will apply history and social science skills to locate and describe major geographic features of Africa, Antarctica, Asia, Australia, Europe, North America, and South America by
u365 locating and describing the seven continents and the five oceans; and
u366 locating and describing the equator, the Prime Meridian, and the four hemispheres.
u367 [Heading 4] 3.3 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe major geographic features of ancient societies on a world map by
u368 identifying and locating major bodies of water;
u369 identifying and locating major mountain ranges;
u370 describing how geographic features have impacted the lives of individuals; and
u371 connecting geography to major historical events.
u372 [Heading 3] History
u373 [Heading 4] 3.4 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the geographic, political, economic, and social structures and innovations of ancient Egypt by
u374 locating ancient Egypt on a map of the world;
u375 connecting the geography of ancient Egypt and its economy;
u376 identifying and explaining the government;
u377 describing the arts and innovations; and
u378 identifying and explaining the architecture and its influence in the world today.
u379 [Heading 4] 3.5 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the geographic, political, economic, and social structures and innovations of ancient China by
u380 locating ancient China on a map of the world;
u381 connecting the geography of ancient China and its economy;
u382 identifying and explaining the government;
u383 describing the arts and innovations; and
u384 identifying and explaining the architecture and its influence in the world today.
u385 [Heading 4] 3.6 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the geographic, political, economic, and social structures and innovations of ancient Greece by
u386 locating ancient Greece on a map of the world;
u387 describing the unique geography of ancient Greece;
u388 identifying and explaining direct democracy;
u389 describing the arts and innovations; and
u390 identifying and explaining the architecture and its influence in the world today.
u391 [Heading 4] 3.7 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the geographic, political, economic, and social structures and innovations of ancient Rome by
u392 locating ancient Rome on a map of the world;
u393 connecting the geography of ancient Rome and its economy;
u394 identifying and explaining representative democracy;
u395 describing the arts and innovations; and
u396 identifying and explaining the architecture and its influence in the world today.
u397 [Heading 4] 3.8 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the geographic, political, economic, and social structures and innovations of the ancient empire of Mali by
u398 locating the ancient empire of Mali on a map of the world;
u399 connecting the geography of the ancient empire of Mali and its economy;
u400 identifying and explaining the government;
u401 describing the arts and innovations; and
u402 identifying and explaining the architecture and its influence in the world.
u403 [Heading 4] 3.9 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain the basic structure of the United States government by
u404 explaining the purpose of governments and understanding that other countries have governments similar to and different from that of the United States;
u405 explaining how the Constitution supports the structure of the United States government;
u406 identifying and describing the three branches of government;
u407 explaining what governments do at the national, state, and local levels; and
u408 explaining how local, state, and national governments are organized.
u409 [Heading 3] Economics
u410 [Heading 4] 3.10 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain basic economic principles by
u411 defining production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services;
u412 understanding different cultures and the natural, human, and capital resources they use in the production of goods and services;
u413 recognizing that because people and regions cannot produce everything they want, they specialize in what they do best and trade for the rest; and
u414 identifying examples of making an economic choice and explaining the idea of opportunity cost.
u415 [Heading 2] Grade 4: Virginia Studies
u416 The standards for Virginia Studies allow students to develop a greater understanding of Virginia’s rich history, from the contributions and cultures of its Indigenous People and the founding of Jamestown to the present. Geographic, economic, and civic concepts are presented within this historical context. Students will use geographic tools to examine the influence of physical and cultural geography on Virginia history. Students will develop the skills needed to analyze, interpret, and demonstrate knowledge of important events and ideas in our history and will understand the contributions made by people of diverse cultural and ethnic backgrounds. Ideas that form the foundation for political institutions in Virginia and the United States will be included as part of the story of Virginia.
u417 [Heading 3] Skills
u418 [Heading 4] Skills VS The student will apply history and social science skills to the content by
u419 analyzing and interpreting information sources including, but not limited to artifacts, primary and secondary sources, charts, graphs, and diagrams;
u420 applying geographic skills to identify and understand geographic features and connections;
u421 developing questions, enhancing curiosity, and engaging in critical thinking and analysis;
u422 using evidence to construct timelines, classify events, and distinguish fact from opinion;
u423 comparing and contrasting people, places, and events;
u424 identifying cause-and-effect relationships to clarify and explain content;
u425 using economic decision-making models to make informed economic decisions and to explain the incentives and consequences of a specific choice;
u426 practicing civility, respect, hard work, honesty, trustworthiness, and responsible citizenship skills; and
u427 developing products that reflect an understanding of content.
u428 [Heading 3] Physical Geography
u429 [Heading 4] VS.1 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain the relationship between physical geography and the lives of Virginia’s peoples, past and present by
u430 locating Virginia and its bordering states on maps of the United States and North America;
u431 locating and describing the relative location and physical characteristics of Virginia's five geographic regions on a map; and
u432 locating, identifying, and describing the impact of Virginia’s bodies of water on its history, economy, and culture.
u433 [Heading 3] Virginia’s Indigenous People
u434 [Heading 4] VS.2 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the Indigenous nations of Virginia past and present by
u435 describing how archaeologists have recovered artifacts from important places in the history of Indigenous people including, but not limited to Werowocomoco;
u436 describing Virginia’s three most prominent Indigenous language groups (i.e., the Algonquian, the Siouan, and the Iroquoian);
u437 describing the diversity among the Indigenous nations;
u438 describing the relationships and interactions of Virginia’s Indigenous People and their environment, circa 1600; and
u439 describing the lives and cultures of Virginia’s Indigenous People leading to the present day.
u440 [Heading 3] 1607 through the American Revolution
u441 [Heading 4] VS.3 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain the causes and effects of events associated with the first permanent English settlement in North America by
u442 explaining the reasons for English colonization;
u443 describing the economic and geographic influences on the decision to settle at Jamestown;
u444 describing the importance of the Virginia Company of London Charter (April 10, 1606) in establishing the Jamestown colony;
u445 describing the interactions between the English colonists and the Indigenous people, including the role of the Powhatan in the survival of the colonists;
u446 describing the hardships faced by settlers at Jamestown and the changes that took place to ensure survival including, but not limited to trade with the Powhatan, the leadership of Captain John Smith, land ownership, and the successful commercial cultivation of tobacco;
u447 analyzing the impact of the arrival of Africans and women to the Jamestown settlement; and
u448 identifying the significance of establishing the General Assembly (1619), the first representative legislative body in English America.
u449 [Heading 4] VS.4 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand life in the Virginia colony by
u450 explaining the importance and influence of agriculture;
u451 examining how colonial Virginia reflected the culture of Virginia’s Indigenous People, European (English, Scots-Irish, German) immigrants, and Africans;
u452 distinguishing between indentured servants and enslaved people, including how European countries traded for, transported, and sold Africans to be enslaved in British North America beginning in the 17th century;
u453 describing the laws that established race-based enslavement;
u454 explaining the reasons for the relocation of Virginia’s capital from Jamestown to Williamsburg; and
u455 describing ways people exchanged goods and services in colonial Virginia.
u456 [Heading 4] VS.5 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain Virginia and Virginians’ role during the American Revolution by
u457 explaining the principles and events that convinced the colonists to declare independence and go to war with Great Britain, as expressed in the Declaration of Independence;
u458 examining the important contributions, leadership, and experiences of Virginians during the war including, but not limited to George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, George Mason, James Madison, James Armistead Lafayette, Indigenous people, women, and free and enslaved Blacks;
u459 identifying the reasons for the relocation of Virginia’s capital from Williamsburg to Richmond; and
u460 identifying the importance of the American victory at Yorktown.
u461 [Heading 3] Political Growth and Western Expansion: 1775 to the Mid-1800s
u462 [Heading 4] VS.6 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain the establishment and growth of the new American nation with emphasis on the role of Virginians and events in Virginia during the 18th and 19th centuries by
u463 explaining the roles of George Washington (known as the “Father of Our Country”), James Madison (known as the “Father of the Constitution”), and Patrick Henry (known for his “Give Me Liberty or Give Me Death” speech);
u464 explaining the development of founding Virginia documents, including the Virginia Declaration of Rights (written by George Mason) and the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom (written by Thomas Jefferson);
u465 describing how principles of these founding Virginia documents inspired the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution of Virginia, the Constitution of the United States, and the Bill of Rights;
u466 explaining how geographical features and technological advances impacted the western movement in the first half of the 1800s; and
u467 explaining the causes and events of Nat Turner’s Rebellion and how it impacted the institution of slavery.
u468 [Heading 3] Civil War and Postwar Eras
u469 [Heading 4] VS.7 The students will apply history and social science skills to understand the key people, events, and issues of the Civil War and Virginia’s role by
u470 explaining the role of John Brown and the impact of the raid at Harper’s Ferry;
u471 describing how the institution of slavery was the cause of the Civil War, and secondary factors that contributed to the secession of the southern states;
u472 explaining the significance of the Underground Railroad and the contributions of Harriet Tubman;
u473 explaining major events and issues that divided Virginians and led to secession, war, and the creation of West Virginia;
u474 identifying major battles that took place in Virginia;
u475 identifying and explaining the leadership roles of Virginians including, but not limited to Thomas “Stonewall” Jackson, Robert E. Lee, William Harvey Carney, Winfield Scott, and Powhatan Beaty; and
u476 evaluating the experiences and contributions of Indigenous people and enslaved and free Blacks and their allies during the war including, but not limited to Elizabeth Van Lew and Mary Bowser.
u477 [Heading 4] VS.8 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain the reconstruction of Virginia following the Civil War by
u478 describing what the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments to the Constitution accomplished;
u479 examining the effects of Reconstruction on life in Virginia;
u480 describing the role that the Freedmen’s Schools played in the lives of African Americans in Virginia after the Civil War;
u481 discussing the election of African American leader John Mercer Langston to Congress in 1890;
u482 describing the effect of the Supreme Court’s decision in Plessy v. Ferguson; and
u483 analyzing the effects of segregation and “Jim Crow” laws on life in Virginia.
u484 [Heading 4] VS.9 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the ways in which Virginia became interconnected and diverse by
u485 explaining the importance of railroads, waterways, new industries, and the growth of cities to Virginia’s economic development in the late 1800s; and
u486 explaining the economic and social transition from a rural society to a more urban society.
u487 [Heading 3] Virginia: 1900 to Present
u488 [Heading 4] VS.10 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the role Virginians played in American history during World War I and World War II by a. examining how key leaders and citizens prepared for wartime; and b. describing the contributions made by military veterans and Medal of Honor recipients.
u489 [Heading 4] VS.11 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the Civil Rights Movement in Virginia by
u490 explaining the social and political events connected to disenfranchisement of African American voters in Virginia in the early 20th century, desegregation, court decisions, and Massive Resistance, with emphasis on the role of Virginians in the Supreme Court cases including, but not limited to Brown v. Board of Education; and
u491 investigating the political, social, and economic effects of choices made during the Civil Rights Era by Virginians including, but not limited to Maggie Walker, Robert Russa Moton, Barbara Johns, Samuel Wilbert Tucker, Oliver W. Hill, Sr., Irene Morgan, Arthur R. Ashe, A. Linwood Holton, Jr., and L. Douglas Wilder.
u492 [Heading 4] VS.12 The student will use history and social science skills to recognize why Virginia is known as the “Mother of Presidents.”
u493 [Heading 4] VS.13 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain Virginia’s role in the global economy in the 21st century by
u494 examining major products and industries important to Virginia; and
u495 examining the impact of the ideas, innovations, and advancements of Virginians on a global market.
u496 [Heading 2] Grade 5: United States History to 1865
u497 Students will use skills for historical and geographical analysis to explore the early history of the United States and understand ideas and events that strengthened the Union. The standards for this course relate to the history of the United States from pre-colonial times until 1865. Students will continue to learn fundamental concepts in civics, economics, and geography as they study United States history in chronological sequence and learn about change and continuity in our history. They also will study documents and speeches that laid the foundation for American ideals and institutions and will examine the everyday life of people at different times in the country’s history through the use of primary and secondary sources.
u498 [Heading 3] Skills
u499 [Heading 4] Skills USI The student will apply history and social science skills to the content by
u500 synthesizing evidence from information sources including, but not limited to artifacts, primary and secondary sources, charts, graphs, and diagrams to understand events in United States history;
u501 applying geographic skills to determine patterns and trends of people, places, or events;
u502 developing questions, enhancing curiosity, and engaging in critical thinking and analysis;
u503 integrating evidence to construct and analyze timelines, classify events, and distinguish fact from opinion;
u504 comparing and contrasting historical, cultural, economic, and political perspectives;
u505 determining and explaining cause-and-effect relationships;
u506 using economic decision-making models to make a decision and explain the incentives and consequences of a specific choice;
u507 engaging and communicating as a civil and informed individual with persons with different perspectives; and
u508 developing products that reflect an understanding of content.
u509 [Heading 3] Geography of North America
u510 [Heading 4] USI.1 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the geography of North America by
u511 locating North America in relation to the other continents and the oceans;
u512 locating and describing major geographic regions and bodies of water of North America and their impact on the early history of the United States; and
u513 locating the 50 states.
u514 [Heading 3] Early Cultures of North America
u515 [Heading 4] USI.2 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe how early cultures developed throughout North America by
u516 describing how archaeologists have recovered artifacts from ancient settlements including, but not limited to Cactus Hill in Virginia; and
u517 locating and explaining where Indigenous people lived prior to the arrival of Europeans, with an emphasis on how the various geographic regions they inhabited influenced their daily lives.
u518 [Heading 4] USI.3 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain European exploration and colonization in North America by
u519 describing the motivations for, obstacles to, and accomplishments of the Dutch, English, French, Portuguese, and Spanish explorations; and
u520 describing cultural and economic interactions between Indigenous people and Europeans that led to cooperation and conflict.
u521 [Heading 4] USI.4 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand how the Western Hemisphere impacted West Africa by
u522 identifying the location and characteristics of West African societies of Ghana, Mali, and Songhai before European exploration;
u523 examining the arrival of the first Africans to colonial America at Old Point Comfort (Fort Monroe);
u524 explaining the Transatlantic Slave Trade and its impact on the African coast and the Western Hemisphere; and
u525 identifying the cultural connections, conflicts, and common values of enslaved people in the Western Hemisphere, as well as challenges and hardships endured by enslaved people brought to colonial America.
u526 [Heading 3] Colonial America and the American Revolution
u527 [Heading 4] USI.5 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain the social, political, religious, economic, and geographic factors that shaped colonial America by
u528 describing the characteristics and differences among the New England, the Mid-Atlantic, and the Southern colonies;
u529 explaining Virginia’s importance as one of the most populous and wealthiest colonies;
u530 comparing life from the perspectives of various groups including, but not limited to large landowners, farmers, artisans, clergy, merchants, women, indentured servants, and enslaved and free Blacks;
u531 explaining the specialization and interdependence of the regions; and
u532 explaining the changing political and economic relationships between the colonies and Great Britain including, but not limited to representative government and self-rule in the colonies.
u533 [Heading 4] USI.6 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain the American Revolution by
u534 identifying the causes and effects of the French and Indian War;
u535 identifying the issues of dissatisfaction that led to the American Revolution including, but not limited to the “injuries and usurpations” outlined in the Declaration of Independence;
u536 comparing and contrasting the political ideas and principles that shaped the revolutionary movement;
u537 describing the leadership roles of individuals including, but not limited to George Washington, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, Patrick Henry, Thomas Paine, John Adams, and the Marquis de Lafayette; and
u538 examining the causes, course, and consequences of key events and battles of the era.
u539 [Heading 3] A New Nation and its Expansion
u540 [Heading 4] USI.7 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the challenges faced by the new nation by
u541 explaining the strengths, weaknesses, and outcomes of the government established by the Articles of Confederation;
u542 describing the Constitutional Convention and the development of the Constitution of the United States, with an emphasis on the role of James Madison;
u543 examining constitutional issues debated, including the role of the national government and the debate over ratifying the Constitution, the influence of the Federalist Papers, and the reasons for the addition of the Bill of Rights;
u544 explaining the Three-Fifths Compromise; and
u545 examining the three branches of government.
u546 [Heading 4] USI.8 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain westward expansion and reform in America from 1801 to 1861 by
u547 describing how territorial expansion affected the political map of the United States including, but not limited to the Louisiana Purchase, the Lewis and Clark Expedition and the role of Sacagawea, the acquisitions of Florida, Texas, Oregon, and California, and the results of the Mexican-American War;
u548 describing the causes, course of events, and effects of the War of 1812, the role of Andrew Jackson, and the development of the Monroe Doctrine;
u549 identifying geographic, economic, and religious motivations that influenced the movement of settlers;
u550 analyzing the impact of westward expansion on Indigenous people including, but not limited to the Indian Removal Act (1830), the Trail of Tears, and the Seminole Wars;
u551 explaining technological advancements and innovations and their effects on life in America including, but not limited to the cotton gin, the reaper, the steam engine, and the steam locomotive;
u552 describing major developments in the abolitionist and women’s suffrage movements; and
u553 explaining how the expansion of U.S. territory led to increased momentum for the abolitionist and women’s suffrage movements.
u554 [Heading 3] The Civil War
u555 [Heading 4] USI.9 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the cause, major events, and effects of the Civil War by
u556 describing how slavery and its expansion was the primary cause of the cultural, economic, and constitutional issues that divided the nation and led to the secession of southern states;
u557 describing the differences in the economies of the North and the South, growth of agriculture and industry, and how those economies impacted the outcome of the war;
u558 evaluating the leadership and impact of Abraham Lincoln during the Civil War;
u559 describing how individuals influenced the course of the Civil War including, but not limited to Jefferson Davis, Ulysses S. Grant, Robert E. Lee, William Tecumseh Sherman, Thomas “Stonewall” Jackson, and Frederick Douglass;
u560 describing major political texts during the war including, but not limited to Lincoln’s Inaugural Address, the Emancipation Proclamation, the Gettysburg Address, and Lincoln’s Second Inaugural Address; and
u561 analyzing the effects of the war from various perspectives of Union and Confederate soldiers, Indigenous people, women, European Americans, and enslaved and free Blacks during the war including, but not limited to Clara Barton, John Brown, Robert Smalls, Harriet Tubman, Elizabeth Van Lew, and Mary Bowser.
u562 [Heading 2] Grade 6: United States History: 1865 to the Present
u563 Students will continue to use skills for historical and geographical analysis as they examine United States history since 1865. The standards for this course relate to the history of the United States from the Reconstruction era to the present. Students will continue to develop and build upon the fundamental concepts and skills in civics, economics, and geography within the context of United States history. Students will use investigation as a foundation to delve into the political, economic, and social challenges facing the nation once it reunited after the Civil War. This foundation provides a pathway to develop an understanding of how the American experience shaped the world’s political and economic landscapes.
u564 [Heading 3] Skills
u565 [Heading 4] Skills USII The student will apply history and social science skills to the content by
u566 synthesizing evidence from information sources including, but not limited to artifacts, primary and secondary sources, charts, graphs, and diagrams to understand events in United States history;
u567 applying geographic skills to determine and predict patterns and trends of people, places, and events;
u568 developing questions, enhancing curiosity, and engaging in critical thinking and analysis;
u569 integrating evidence to construct and analyze timelines, classify events, and distinguish fact from opinion;
u570 comparing and contrasting people, places, events, and historical and political perspectives;
u571 determining and explaining cause-and-effect relationships;
u572 using an economic decision-making model to analyze the costs and benefits and explain the incentives and consequences of a specific choice made in U.S. history;
u573 engaging and communicating as a civil and informed individual with persons with different perspectives; and
u574 developing products that reflect an understanding of content.
u575 [Heading 3] Westward Expansion and Its Impact on Indigenous People
u576 [Heading 4] USII.1 The student will apply history and social science skills to examine westward expansion after the mid-19th century by
u577 explaining how technology allowed settlers to adapt to the physical features and climate of the West;
u578 identifying the motivations for westward expansion;
u579 examining the impact of policies, legislation, and treaties associated with the growth of the nation; and
u580 explaining the effect that the growth of the United States had on Indigenous people.
u581 [Heading 3] Effects of Reconstruction
u582 [Heading 4] USII.2 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the ongoing effects of Reconstruction on American life after the mid-19th century by
u583 describing the impact of the assassination of Abraham Lincoln and the political aftermath of the Civil War;
u584 analyzing the goals and effects of the Reconstruction Amendments, the Freedmen’s Bureau, and civil rights policies that changed the meaning of citizenship in the United States;
u585 describing the legacies of Abraham Lincoln and the Gettysburg Address, Ulysses S. Grant, Robert E. Lee, Hiram Revels, and Frederick Douglass;
u586 describing the role of Congress and the Supreme Court in specific plans and policies including, but not limited to Lincoln’s Ten Percent Plan;
u587 describing the role and motivations of individuals who sought to gain from Reconstruction including, but not limited to formerly enslaved people elected to office during the years right after the Civil War; and
u588 explaining how the 1876 presidential election led to the end of Reconstruction.
u589 [Heading 3] Industrialization and Growth
u590 [Heading 4] USII.3 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand how industrialization changed life in rural and urban America after the Civil War by
u591 explaining relationships among natural resources, transportation, and industrial development from 1865;
u592 explaining the impact of new inventions, the rise of big business, the growth of industry, and the changes to life on American farms in response to industrialization;
u593 evaluating and explaining the impact of the Progressive Movement on child labor, working conditions, the rise of organized labor, support for eugenics as a social policy, immigration policy, women’s suffrage, and the temperance movement;
u594 explaining the events, factors, and motivations that caused individuals and groups to migrate to the United States towards the end of the 19th century;
u595 examining the cause-and-effect relationship between rapid population growth and city government services and infrastructure;
u596 explaining how governmental actions including, but not limited to the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, caused harm to Chinese Americans and other immigrants;
u597 explaining how various groups worked to alleviate the issues facing new immigrants and how immigrants advocated for themselves; and
u598 describing the technological advances and the broader impact of the 1893 Chicago World's Fair on America’s rise as a world leader in innovation, business, and trade.
u599 [Heading 4] USII.4 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain the changing role of the United States from the late 19th century through World War I by
u600 explaining the legacy of Theodore Roosevelt including, but not limited to conservation contributions, progressivism, the building of the Panama Canal, and his role in the Spanish-American War;
u601 explaining the reasons for and results of the Spanish-American War, including the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine;
u602 analyzing the major causes and consequences of World War I and examining the roles of key leaders and groups;
u603 examining the evolution of warfare tactics and technology including, but not limited to cavalry, air, submarine, chemical, trench warfare, and other technological advancements;
u604 explaining how the war was a catalyst for the United States gaining international power and expanding its sphere of international influence; and
u605 examining how post-war sanctions and the failure of the League of Nations set the stage for World War II.
u606 [Heading 4] USII.5 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the social, political, economic, and technological changes of the early 20th century by
u607 explaining how capitalism and free markets helped foster developments in factory and labor productivity, transportation, and communication and how rural electrification changed American life and the standard of living;
u608 examining how the rise of communism affected America including, but not limited to the first Red Scare;
u609 describing the reasons for and impact of the Great Migration;
u610 describing the events and leaders that lead to prohibition, the Women’s Suffrage Movement, and the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment including, but not limited to Susan B. Anthony, Lucy Burns, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Carrie Chapman Catt, Ida B. Wells-Barnett, and Sojourner Truth;
u611 examining the art, literature, and music of the 1920s and 1930s including, but not limited to the Roaring Twenties and the Harlem Renaissance;
u612 analyzing the causes of the Great Depression and the impact of the Dust Bowl on the lives of Americans;
u613 describing the features, effects, programs, and lasting institutions of Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal;
u614 describing racial segregation, housing discrimination via redlining, the rise of “Jim Crow” laws, Black Codes, and threats of violence including, but not limited to intimidation, lynchings, armed conflicts, suppressed voting rights, and limits on political participation faced by African Americans and other people during post-Reconstruction; and
u615 analyzing events and impacts of African American leaders in response to “Jim Crow” including, but not limited to the formation of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), strikes, protests, the role of historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs), and the work of leaders like Booker T. Washington, W.E.B. DuBois, Mary White Ovington, and Ida B. Wells-Barnett.
u616 [Heading 3] The Second World War and America’s Transformation
u617 [Heading 4] USII.6 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the major causes and events of World War II and the effects of America’s role by
u618 explaining the rise and spread of fascism and totalitarianism internationally and the policy of appeasement towards Nazi Germany;
u619 explaining the causes and events that led to American involvement in the war, including the attack on Pearl Harbor;
u620 locating and describing the major events and turning points of the war in Europe including, but not limited to the allied invasion of Italy, the invasion of Normandy (D-Day), the Battle of the Bulge, and the Battle of Berlin;
u621 locating and describing the major events and turning points of the war in the Pacific including, but not limited to the Battle of Iwo Jima, the Battle of Midway, and the Battle of Okinawa;
u622 explaining and evaluating the role of key political and military leaders of the Allies and Axis powers including, but not limited to the United States, Germany, Japan, the Soviet Union, Italy, and Great Britain;
u623 identifying the roles and sacrifices of U.S. armed forces, including prisoners of war (POWs), women, and segregated units, as well as other notable heroics including, but not limited to the contributions of the Tuskegee Airmen, the 442nd Regimental Combat Team, the Women's Army Auxiliary Corps, the Women Airforce Service Pilots, the Navajo Code Talkers, and the Bedford Boys;
u624 evaluating the effects of the war on the home front including, but not limited to women in the workforce, the incarceration of Japanese Americans, rationing, conservation, and war bonds;
u625 examining the causes and consequences of the Holocaust including, but not limited to Jewish life before the Holocaust, antisemitism, the rise of the Nazi Party, Nuremberg Laws, persecution of Jews and other targeted groups, resistance efforts, the United States’ response, and the Nuremberg Trials; and
u626 describing the events that led to the surrender of the Axis powers and America’s role in the Allied victory including, but not limited to the Manhattan Project, as well as events that shaped post-war peace.
u627 [Heading 3] The Cold War
u628 [Heading 4] USII.7 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the transformation of U.S. foreign policy between the end of World War II and the new millennium by
u629 explaining how key decisions and agreements including, but not limited to the Atlantic Charter, formation of the United Nations, and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) established international allies;
u630 describing the Marshall Plan’s objectives for rebuilding Europe, the occupation and reconstruction of Japan, and the emergence of the United States and the Soviet Union as superpowers;
u631 describing the differences between a communist nation and a democratic nation including, but not limited to self-governance and economic philosophy;
u632 examining the role of the United States in fighting communism and defending freedom during the Cold War including, but not limited to the Berlin Airlift, conflicts in Korea and Vietnam, the roles of John F. Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev during the Cuban missile crisis, the fall of the Berlin Wall, and the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe; and
u633 explaining the collapse of communism in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe and the end of the Cold War, including the actions of Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev.
u634 [Heading 3] Late 20th to Early 21st Century
u635 [Heading 4] USII.8 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze the key changing patterns of society during the second half of the 20th and early 21st centuries by
u636 examining the contributions of key leaders and events during the Civil Rights Era including, but not limited to Robert Kennedy, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Malcolm X, Medgar Evers, John Lewis, Rosa Parks, Ruby Bridges, Jonathan Daniels, Dorothy Height, the Selma march, sit-ins, and boycotts;
u637 explaining the significance of urban renewal plans including, but not limited to Jackson Ward in Richmond and Vinegar Hill in Charlottesville;
u638 examining key events of the 1960s and 1970s including, but not limited to the Apollo missions, the moon landing, assassinations, the women’s movement, the creation of public sector labor unions, the Watergate scandal and Nixon’s resignation, and the passing of the Clean Air Act and the Clean Water Act;
u639 describing the impact of the baby boom, the changing demographics of the United States, and the ending of the military draft; and
u640 describing the protections and provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA);
u641 describing the similarities and differences between the objectives of the women’s movement of the early and mid-20th century;
u642 describing expanded educational and economic opportunities for military veterans, women, and minorities; and
u643 describing how the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, including the heroic sacrifices of Flight 93 passengers, significantly impacted domestic policies, American society, and global perspectives on the war on terror.
u644 [Heading 3] Science and Technology: Ongoing Advancement
u645 USII.9 The student will apply history and social science skills by
u646 studying the iterative and ongoing advancements in science and technology; and
u647 describing the changes in American culture related to music, art, media, and communication, as well as advancements in American economics related to banking, business, and industry.
u648 [Heading 2] Grade 7: Civics and Economics
u649 Civics and Economics is the foundational course for Virginia and United States Government. It examines the roles citizens play in the political, governmental, and economic systems in the United States. Students will examine the foundational documents and principles around which the constitutions of Virginia and the United States were established; identify the rights, duties, and responsibilities of citizens; and describe the structure and operation of government at the local, state, and national levels. Through the economics standards, students will compare the United States economy to other types of economies and consider the government’s role in the U.S. economy. Students will investigate the process by which decisions are made in the U.S. market economy and explain the government’s role in it. The standards identify personal character traits, such as patriotism, respect for the law, willingness to perform public service, and a sense of civic duty, that facilitate thoughtful and effective active participation in the civic life of an increasingly diverse democratic society.
u650 [Heading 3] Skills
u651 [Heading 4] Skills CE The student will apply history and social science skills to the content by
u652 selecting and synthesizing evidence from information sources including, but not limited to artifacts, primary and secondary sources, charts, graphs, and diagrams to understand civics and economics;
u653 applying geographic skills to determine and predict patterns and trends of people, places, or events;
u654 developing questions, enhancing curiosity, and engaging in critical thinking and analysis;
u655 integrating evidence to construct and analyze timelines, classify events, and to distinguish fact and opinion;
u656 comparing and contrasting historical, cultural, economic, and political perspectives;
u657 determining and explaining cause and effect relationships;
u658 analyzing the costs and benefits and incentives and consequences of a specific choice using various economic decision-making models;
u659 engaging and communicating as a civil and informed individual with persons with different perspectives; and
u660 developing products that reflect an understanding of research, content, and civics and economic concepts.
u661 [Heading 3] American Constitutional Government
u662 CE.1 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain the foundations of the American constitutional democracy by
u663 explaining the fundamental principles of limited government, republicanism, federalism, checks and balances, separation of powers, and popular sovereignty;
u664 describing the Magna Carta, English common law, the charters of the Virginia Company of London (April 10, 1606; May 23, 1609; and March 12, 1612), the Virginia Declaration of Rights, the Declaration of Independence, the Articles of Confederation, and the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom and their influence on the Constitution of Virginia and the Constitution of the United States, including the Bill of Rights;
u665 comparing and contrasting debates, compromises, and plans surrounding the drafting and ratification of the Constitution of the United States and the Bill of Rights;
u666 describing the purpose of the Constitution of the United States as stated in its preamble;
u667 explaining the fundamental concepts of the U.S. government including, but not limited to due process, equal justice under the law, equal protection, elections and a representative government, limited government, right to private property, rule of law, Supremacy Clause, and separation of powers; and
u668 describing the procedures for amending the Constitution of Virginia and the Constitution of the United States.
u669 [Heading 4] CE.2 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze how American constitutional government functions at the national level by
u670 describing the structure and powers of the government (the three branches of government);
u671 explaining the legislative branch and the lawmaking process as explained in Article I of the Constitution of the United States;
u672 explaining the particular role and powers of the executive branch as explained in Article II of the Constitution of the United States;
u673 explaining the particular role and powers of the judicial branch as explained in Article III of the Constitution of the United States; and
u674 explaining the principle of separation of powers and the operation of checks and balances.
u675 [Heading 4] CE.3 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze how constitutional government functions at the state level by
u676 describing the structure and powers of the state government (the three branches of government);
u677 explaining the state lawmaking process;
u678 describing the roles and powers of the executive branch and regulatory boards as they affect states;
u679 explaining the relationship between state governments and the national government in the federal system, referencing Federalist No.10 and Federalist No. 51; and
u680 explaining the principle of separation of powers and the operation of checks and balances at the state level.
u681 [Heading 4] CE.4 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze American constitutional government at the local level by
u682 describing the structure and powers of the local government and explaining the local lawmaking process;
u683 describing how state, national, and international issues and events impact local decision making; and
u684 comparing and contrasting powers and responsibilities of local, state, federal, and tribal governments including, but not limited to citizen engagement, how each is financed, and how they work together and independently.
u685 [Heading 4] CE.5 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain the judicial systems established by the Constitution of Virginia and the Constitution of the United States by
u686 describing the system of state and federal courts including, but not limited to jurisdiction and judicial review;
u687 describing how due-process protections seek to ensure justice;
u688 comparing and contrasting civil and criminal cases; and
u689 explaining the effects of Supreme Court cases affecting the judiciary including, but not limited to Marbury v. Madison.
u690 [Heading 3] Citizenship and Civic Life
u691 [Heading 4] CE.6 The student will apply history and social science skills to define citizenship by
u692 describing the processes by which an individual becomes a citizen of the United States;
u693 describing the rights and privileges guaranteed by the First Amendment, including freedoms of religion, speech, press, assembly, and petition, the rights guaranteed by due process and equal protection under the law (Fifth, Sixth, and Fourteenth Amendments), and protection from unreasonable government search and seizure (Fourth Amendment);
u694 examining ways to peacefully work for change in communities or the nation by participating in political campaigns and methods of peacefully petitioning the government for change;
u695 examining how civic participation can address community needs and serve the public good, including the importance of volunteering, staying informed about current issues, and respecting differing beliefs in a diverse society;
u696 examining the process and importance of immigration policies at different points in U.S. history; and
u697 reviewing the criteria and exam for naturalizing U.S. citizens.
u698 [Heading 4] CE.7 The student will apply history and social science skills that exhibit effective and respectful participation in civic life including, but not limited to civility, trustworthiness and honesty, courtesy, respect for the rights of others, personal responsibility, military service, self-reliance, hard work, respect for the law, patriotism, and service in one’s community.
u699 [Heading 3] The Political Process
u700 [Heading 4] CE.8 The student will apply history and social science skills to examine the political process at the local, state, and national levels of government by
u701 describing the origins, history, and functions of political parties;
u702 analyzing campaigns for elective office, with emphasis on the roles of candidates, volunteers, the media, voters, and poll watchers;
u703 explaining the role of campaign contributions and the cost of campaigns;
u704 examining the history of and requirements for voter registration; and
u705 describing the role of the Electoral College in the election of the president and vice president.
u706 [Heading 4] CE.9 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain the role of the media and social media as well as its influence on local, state, and national levels of government by
u707 explaining the role and rights of the press in reporting events;
u708 describing the effect biased reporting can have on public opinion;
u709 explaining the role that individuals play in the political policy-making process by expressing their opinions formally or informally via print media, electronic media, or in-person;
u710 evaluating the effect of social media on political campaigns, politics, and civic discourse;
u711 identifying the source of information and considering possible motivations or biases of its creator; and
u712 evaluating multiple sources describing the same event or idea and reflecting on the reasons for any discrepancies.
u713 [Heading 4] CE.10 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze the role of public participation in American civic life by
u714 describing duties of citizens, including paying taxes, serving on a jury, following the law, and registering for selective service;
u715 evaluating voting responsibilities, voting dates, voting and processes in Virginia; and
u716 explaining voter eligibility and requirements for registration.
u717 [Heading 3] Economic Decisions
u718 [Heading 4] CE.11 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze how economic decisions are made in the marketplace and in daily life by
u719 explaining that because of scarcity, consumers, producers, and governments must make economic choices, and understanding that all choices have an opportunity cost;
u720 explaining the importance of innovation and productivity, including the freedom to choose occupations, the role of technology, and the development of human capital; and
u721 comparing and contrasting free-market, command, and mixed economies to determine how each affects the allocation of limited resources and the subsequent effects on individuals’ lives.
u722 [Heading 4] CE.12 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the United States economy by
u723 evaluating the shared fundamental principles and connection of free enterprise and democracy;
u724 describing the critical components of the United States economy, such as limited government, private property, markets, consumer sovereignty, and competition;
u725 explaining the concept of inflation and the effect of supply and demand on consumer prices in a market economy;
u726 describing the types of business organizations and the role of entrepreneurship;
u727 explaining the role of consumers, producers, and government interactions on the economy;
u728 explaining how financial institutions are critical to creating capital to fuel economic growth for individuals and the larger economy by channeling funds from savers to borrowers through lending; and
u729 analyzing the role of Virginia in the United States and global economies, with an emphasis on the effect of technological innovations.
u730 [Heading 4] CE.13 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze the role of government in the United States economy by
u731 examining the effect of competition in the marketplace;
u732 explaining how and why government provides certain public goods and services;
u733 describing how local, state, and federal governments allocate their budgets and collect taxes to pay for goods and services;
u734 explaining the structure and main function of the Federal Reserve System and how it acts as the nation’s central bank;
u735 explaining the role of government currency and analyzing the purpose of a money economy;
u736 describing how governments regulate commerce to protect consumers, the environment, competition in the marketplace, and property rights; and
u737 evaluating how and why governments regulate industry, labor, competition, and monopolies in the marketplace.
u738 [Heading 4] CE.14 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain career opportunities and understand the fundamentals of personal finance by
u739 identifying the talents, interests, and aspirations that can influence career choice;
u740 identifying the attitudes and behaviors that strengthen individual work ethic and promote career success;
u741 identifying human capital, abilities, intellectual and physical skills, work habits, and education, and the changing supply and demand in the economy;
u742 examining the effect of technological change and globalization on career opportunities;
u743 describing the importance of education to one’s intellectual life, lifelong learning, and personal goals;
u744 analyzing the role of financial responsibility in good citizenship including, but not limited to evaluating common forms of credit, savings, and investments;
u745 describing the importance of equal opportunities for access to education and training; and
u746 researching jobs and careers in the public and private sector and understanding the pathways to various careers.
u747 [Heading 2] Grade 8: World Geography
u748 The focus of this course is the study of the world’s people, places, and environments, with an emphasis on world regions. The knowledge, skills, and perspectives of the course are centered on the world’s peoples and their cultural characteristics, landforms and climates, economic development, and migration and settlement patterns. Spatial concepts of geography will be used as a framework for studying interactions between people and their environments. Using geographic resources, students will employ inquiry, research, and technology skills to ask and answer geographic questions. Emphasis will be placed on students understanding and applying geographic concepts and skills to their daily lives.
u749 [Heading 3] Skills
u750 [Heading 4] Skills WG The student will demonstrate skills for historical thinking, geographical analysis, economic decision making, and responsible citizenship by
u751 selecting and synthesizing evidence from information sources including, but not limited to artifacts, primary and secondary sources, charts, graphs, diagrams, and geospatial technologies, including maps, the geographic information system (GIS), and global positioning system (GPS) imagery, to understand the regions of the world;
u752 applying geographic skills to determine and predict patterns and movement of people, places, and events;
u753 developing questions, enhancing curiosity, and engaging in critical thinking and analysis;
u754 investigating and analyzing evidence from multiple sources to construct arguments;
u755 comparing and contrasting historical, cultural, economic, and political perspectives;
u756 determining and explaining cause-and-effect relationships;
u757 using economic decision-making models to analyze and explain the incentives for and consequences of a specific choice;
u758 engaging and communicating as a civil and informed individual with persons with different perspectives;
u759 developing products that reflect an understanding of research, content, and world geography concepts; and
u760 contextualizing, corroborating, and evaluating sources for credibility, propaganda, and bias to determine patterns and trends to understand the world.
u761 [Heading 3] Introduction to Geography
u762 [Heading 4] WG.1 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain how geographic information and geospatial tools are used to make decisions by
u763 explaining how characteristics of regions have led to regional labels;
u764 describing how regional landscapes reflect the physical environment and the cultural characteristics of their inhabitants;
u765 analyzing how cultural characteristics, including the world’s major languages, ethnicities, and religions, link or divide regions; and
u766 explaining how cartography is used to reflect regional perspectives, points of view, and perceptions of an area and the creation of mental maps.
u767 [Heading 3] Resources and the Environment
u768 [Heading 4] WG.2 The student will apply history and social science skills to evaluate the significance of natural, human, and capital resources by
u769 comparing the distribution of major natural resources throughout world regions;
u770 showing the influence of resources on patterns of economic activity and land use; and
u771 evaluating perspectives regarding the use of resources.
u772 [Heading 3] Classifying and Identifying Regions
u773 [Heading 4] WG.3 The student will analyze the characteristics of the regions of the United States and Canada by
u774 identifying and analyzing the location of major geographic regions and major cities on maps and globes;
u775 describing major physical and environmental features and how geography may change over time;
u776 analyzing cultural influences and landscapes; and
u777 explaining important economic characteristics, including the distribution of economic activities and global trade.
u778 [Heading 4] WG.4 The student will analyze the characteristics of the regions of Latin America and the Caribbean by
u779 identifying and analyzing the location of major geographic regions and major cities on maps and globes;
u780 describing major physical and environmental features and how geography may change over time;
u781 analyzing cultural influences and landscapes; and
u782 explaining important economic characteristics, including the distribution of economic activities and global trade.
u783 [Heading 4] WG.5 The students will analyze the characteristics of the regions of Europe by
u784 identifying and analyzing the location of major geographic regions and major cities on maps and globes;
u785 describing major physical and environmental features and how geography may change over time;
u786 analyzing cultural influences and landscapes; and
u787 explaining important economic characteristics, including the distribution of economic activities and global trade.
u788 [Heading 4] WG.6 The student will analyze the characteristics of the regions of Russia and Central Asia by
u789 identifying and analyzing the location of major geographic regions and major cities on maps and globes;
u790 describing major physical and environmental features and how geography may change over time;
u791 analyzing cultural influences and landscapes; and
u792 explaining important economic characteristics, including the distribution of economic activities and global trade.
u793 [Heading 4] WG.7 The student will analyze the characteristics of the regions of sub-Saharan Africa by
u794 identifying and analyzing the location of major geographic regions and major cities on maps and globes;
u795 describing major physical and environmental features and how geography may change over time;
u796 analyzing cultural influences and landscapes; and
u797 explaining important economic characteristics, including the distribution of economic activities and global trade.
u798 [Heading 4] WG.8 The student will analyze the characteristics of the regions of North Africa and Southwest Asia by
u799 identifying and analyzing the location of major geographic regions and major cities on maps and globes;
u800 describing major physical and environmental features and how geography may change over time;
u801 analyzing cultural influences and landscapes; and
u802 explaining important economic characteristics, including the distribution of economic activities and global trade.
u803 [Heading 4] WG.9 The student will analyze the characteristics of the regions of South Asia and Southeast Asia by
u804 identifying and analyzing the location of major geographic regions and major cities on maps and globes;
u805 describing major physical and environmental features and how geography may change over time;
u806 analyzing cultural influences and landscapes; and
u807 explaining important economic characteristics, including the distribution of economic activities and global trade.
u808 [Heading 4] WG.10 The student will analyze the characteristics of the East Asian region by
u809 identifying and analyzing the location of major geographic regions and major cities on maps and globes;
u810 describing major physical and environmental features and how geography may change over time;
u811 analyzing cultural influences and landscapes; and
u812 explaining important economic characteristics, including the distribution of economic activities and global trade.
u813 [Heading 4] WG.11 The student will analyze the characteristics of the Australian and Pacific Islands regions by
u814 identifying and analyzing the location of major geographic regions and major cities on maps and globes;
u815 describing major physical and environmental features and how geography may change over time;
u816 analyzing cultural influences and landscapes; and
u817 explaining important economic characteristics, including the distribution of economic activities and global trade.
u818 [Heading 3] Population and Migration
u819 [Heading 4] WG.12 The student will apply social science skills to understand the distribution, growth rates, and characteristics of human population by
u820 examining the relationship between demographic data to determine the level of economic development;
u821 distinguishing between developed and developing countries; and
u822 comparing and contrasting the level of economic development to the standard of living, quality of life, form of government, personal freedom, and economic opportunity.
u823 [Heading 4] WG.13 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand population and migration by
u824 explaining how data is used to describe and compare populations; and
u825 analyzing the causes, impacts, and responses related to migration.
u826 [Heading 3] Culture
u827 [Heading 4] WG.14 The student will apply history and social science skills to determine cultural patterns and interactions across time and place by
u828 identifying and describing characteristics that contribute to cultural identity, cultural groups, and cultural landscapes; and
u829 explaining the intellectual exchanges among cultures including, but not limited to the areas of science, geography, mathematics, philosophy, medicine, art, and literature.
u830 [Heading 4] WG.15 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze the patterns of rural and urban migration and development by
u831 applying the concepts of site and situation to major cities in each region; and
u832 explaining how the functions of towns and cities have changed over time.
u833 [Heading 3] Globalization
u834 [Heading 4] WG.16 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the impact of the growing interdependence of the world by
u835 examining factors that influence the distribution of economic activities and trade; and
u836 analyzing global trade and communication networks.
u837 [Heading 3] Political Geography
u838 [Heading 4] WG.17 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze strategic geographic features and resources by
u839 identifying and describing examples of disputed borders and explaining the reasons for the disputes;
u840 describing and explaining examples of the different types of conflicts that may erupt between and among nations; and
u841 analyzing the types of conflicts and cooperation that can occur over the use of rivers and bodies of water.
u842 [Heading 2] Grade 9: World History and Geography to 1500 A.D.
u843 This course will enable students to explore the historic development of people, places, and patterns of life from ancient times until 1500 A.D. in terms of the impact on Western civilization. The study of history rests on knowledge of dates, names, places, events, and ideas. Historical understanding, however, requires students to engage in historical thinking, raise questions, and marshal evidence in support of their answers. Students engaged in historical thinking draw upon chronological thinking, historical comprehension, historical analysis and interpretation, historical research, and decision making. These skills are developed through the study of significant historical substance from the era or society being studied.
u844 [Heading 3] Skills
u845 [Heading 4] Skills WHI The student will apply history and social science skills to the content by
u846 selecting and synthesizing evidence from information sources including, but not limited to artifacts, primary and secondary sources, charts, graphs, and diagrams related to events in world history;
u847 applying geographic skills to determine and predict patterns and trends of people, places, and events;
u848 questioning to construct arguments, using evidence from multiple sources;
u849 investigating and analyzing evidence from multiple sources to construct arguments and draw conclusions;
u850 comparing and contrasting historical, cultural, economic, and political perspectives;
u851 determining cause and effect to analyze connections;
u852 using economic decision-making models to analyze and explain the incentives for and consequences of a specific choice;
u853 engaging and communicating as a civil and informed individual with different perspectives;
u854 developing products that reflect an understanding of research and content; and
u855 contextualizing and corroborating sources to evaluate sources for credibility, propaganda, and bias to determine patterns and trends to understand the ancient world.
u856 [Heading 3] Paleolithic Era into the Agricultural Revolution Neolithic Era
u857 [Heading 4] WHI.1 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the period from the Paleolithic era into the Neolithic era by
u858 describing the archaeological evidence of the first human and their geographic locations;
u859 explaining the effect that geography had on the emergence and migration of hunter-gatherer societies;
u860 describing characteristics of hunter-gatherer societies, including their use of tools and fire;
u861 analyzing how technological and social developments gave rise to sedentary settlements; and
u862 analyzing how archaeological discoveries change current understanding of early societies.
u863 [Heading 3] Social, Cultural, Political, and Economic Development of Early Societies
u864 [Heading 4] WHI.2 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe early societies in the Fertile Crescent by
u865 locating and explaining the development of Egypt and Nubia;
u866 locating and explaining the development of Mesopotamia;
u867 describing the development of the Israelites and the origins, beliefs, traditions, customs, persecution, and spread of Judaism; and
u868 describing the development of the Phoenicians.
u869 [Heading 4] WHI.3 The students will apply history and social science skills to describe ancient Asian societies by
u870 analyzing the impact of geography on the development of ancient India and China, including locating them in time and place and describing their major geographic features;
u871 describing the social, cultural, political, and economic characteristics that define the societies of the Indian subcontinent including, but not limited to contributions and the concepts of varna and Jati;
u872 describing the origins, beliefs, customs, and spread of Hinduism;
u873 describing the origins, beliefs, customs, and spread of Buddhism;
u874 describing the social, cultural, political, and economic development of ancient China; and
u875 describing the influence of Confucianism, Taoism, and Legalism.
u876 [Heading 4] WHI.4 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand Persia and Greece by
u877 describing the major geographic features of the region and analyzing the effect that geography had on its development;
u878 describing the social, cultural, political, and economic aspects of ancient Persia;
u879 describing the social, cultural, political, and economic development of Greece including, but not limited to the significance of Athens and Sparta, the development of citizenship, and the different forms of democracy;
u880 evaluating the causes and consequences of the Persian and Peloponnesian wars;
u881 evaluating the significance of Alexander the Great’s conquest of Greece and the formation and the spread of Hellenistic culture; and
u882 explaining the influence of ancient Greek contributions including, but not limited to science, art, architecture, philosophy, and mathematics on the present day.
u883 [Heading 4] WHI.5 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand Rome and the Byzantine Empire by
u884 describing the influence of geography on Rome’s development and the factors that threatened territorial cohesion;
u885 comparing and contrasting the political, social, and religious structure and development of the Roman Republic and the Roman Empire;
u886 describing the social, cultural, political, and economic development of the Byzantine Empire including, but not limited to the establishment of Constantinople, and the eventual division of the Roman Empire;
u887 describing the origins, beliefs, customs, and spread of Christianity, including the persecution of Christians throughout the Roman Empire and eventual adoption and transmission of Christianity and the New Testament, differences between the Eastern and Western churches, and the influence of Christianity throughout Europe, Middle Asia, the Middle East, and North Africa; and
u888 explaining the influence of Rome including, but not limited to citizenship, slavery, Roman law and guaranteed rights, Roman art, architecture, engineering, and philosophy.
u889 [Heading 4] WHI.6 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand Islamic societies by
u890 identifying the physical features and describing the relationship between climate, land and surrounding bodies of water, as well as nomadic and sedentary ways of life of the Arabian Peninsula;
u891 describing the origins, beliefs, traditions, customs, persecution, and spread of Islam;
u892 explaining the significance of the Qur’an and the Sunnah as the primary sources of Islamic beliefs, practice, and law, and their influence in Muslims’ daily lives;
u893 describing the expansion of territory under Muslim rule, the spread of Islam and the Arabic language among people in these territories, and the cultural and religious acceptance of Islam and the Arabic language; and
u894 describing the growth of cities and the role of merchants in Muslim society and the expansion of trade routes in Asia, Africa, Europe, and the Indian Ocean and identifying the products and inventions that traveled along these routes, including spices, textiles, paper, steel, and new crops.
u895 [Heading 3] The Middle Ages
u896 [Heading 4] WHI.7 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the civilizations of China in the Middle Ages by
u897 describing the reunification of China under the Tang Dynasty and reasons for the spread of Buddhism in Tang China, Korea, and Japan;
u898 describing agricultural, technological, and commercial developments during the Tang and Sung periods;
u899 analyzing the influences of Confucianism and changes in Confucian thought during the Sung and Mongol periods;
u900 explaining the importance of overland trade and maritime expeditions between China and other civilizations in the Mongol Ascendancy and Ming Dynasty;
u901 tracing the historic influence of the tea trade, the manufacture of paper, the development of woodblock printing, the invention of the compass, and the invention of gunpowder; and
u902 describing the development of the imperial state and the scholar-official class.
u903 [Heading 4] WHI.8 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the sub-Saharan civilizations of Ghana and Mali in medieval Africa by
u904 describing the Niger River and the relationship of vegetation zones of forest, savannah, and desert to trade in gold, salt, food, and enslaved people, as well as the growth of the Ghana and Mali empires;
u905 analyzing the importance of family, labor specialization, and regional commerce in the development of states and cities in West Africa;
u906 describing the role of the trans-Saharan caravan trade in the changing religious and cultural characteristics of West Africa and the influence of Islam;
u907 tracing the growth of the Arabic language in government, trade, and Islam; and
u908 describing the importance of written and oral traditions in the transmission of African history and culture.
u909 [Heading 4] WHI.9 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the civilizations of medieval Japan by
u910 describing the significance of Japan’s proximity to China and Korea and the intellectual, linguistic, religious, and philosophical influence of those countries on Japan;
u911 discussing the reign of Prince Shōtoku of Japan and the characteristics of Japanese society and family life during his reign;
u912 describing the values, social customs, and traditions prescribed by the lord-vassal system consisting of shogun, daimyo, and samurai and the lasting influence of the warrior code in the 21st century;
u913 tracing the development of distinctive forms of Japanese Buddhism;
u914 examining the ninth and 10th centuries’ golden age of literature, art, and drama and its lasting effects on culture today, including Murasaki Shikibu’s Tale of Genji; and
u915 analyzing the rise of a military society in the late 12th century and the role of the samurai in that society.
u916 [Heading 4] WHI.10 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the civilizations of medieval Europe by
u917 describing the geography of the European and Eurasian landmass, including location, topography, waterways, vegetation, and climate, and their relationship to ways of life in medieval Europe;
u918 describing the spread of Christianity north of the Alps and the roles played by the early church and by monasteries in its diffusion after the fall of the western half of the Roman Empire; and
u919 explaining the development and role of feudalism in the medieval European economy and the role of the manor as the center of feudal relationships at the foundation of the political order; and
u920 describing the growth of towns and trade as Europe emerged from feudalism.
u921 [Heading 4] WHI.11 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze the conflict and cooperation between the papacy and European monarchs by
u922 explaining the significance of developments in medieval English legal and constitutional practices including, but not limited to the Magna Carta, parliaments, development of habeas corpus, and independent judiciary in England;
u923 analyzing the reasons for the Great Schism in 1054;
u924 tracing the causes and course of the Crusades and the effects on the Christian, Muslim, and Jewish populations in Europe and territorial claims;
u925 describing the decline of Muslim rule in the Iberian Peninsula that resulted in the expansion of Christian rule and the rise of Spanish and Portuguese kingdoms; and
u926 explaining the importance of the Catholic church as a political and intellectual institution and its effects on education, religious orders, preservation of languages and texts, and philosophy.
u927 [Heading 4] WHI.12 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the Mesoamerican and Andean civilizations by
u928 describing the locations, landforms, and climates of Mexico, Central America, and South America and their effects on Mayan, Aztec, and Incan economies, trade, and the development of urban societies;
u929 explaining how and where each empire arose and how the Aztec and Incan empires were defeated by the Spanish;
u930 describing the artistic and oral traditions and architecture in the three civilizations;
u931 describing the Mesoamerican achievements in astronomy and mathematics, including the development of the calendar and the effects of Mesoamerican knowledge of seasonal changes to the civilizations’ agricultural systems; and
u932 examining the roles of people in each society, including class structures, family life, warfare, religious beliefs and practices, and slavery.
u933 [Heading 3] Leading to the Renaissance
u934 [Heading 4] WHI.13 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the factors contributing to the European Renaissance by
u935 determining the economic, political, philosophical, and cultural foundations of the Italian Renaissance;
u936 sequencing events related to the rise of Italian city-states and their political development, including Machiavelli’s theory of governing; and
u937 analyzing the contributions of artists and philosophers of the Italian Renaissance, including Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, and Petrarch.
u938 [Heading 2] Grade 10: World History and Geography: 1500 A.D. to the Present
u939 These standards enable students to examine history and geography from 1500 A.D. to the present, with emphasis on the development of the modern world. The study of history rests on knowledge of dates, names, places, events, and ideas. Historical understanding, however, requires students to engage in historical thinking, raise questions, and marshal evidence in support of their answers. Students engaged in historical thinking draw upon chronological thinking, historical comprehension, historical analysis and interpretation, historical research, and decision making. These skills are developed through the study of significant historical substance.
u940 [Heading 3] Skills
u941 [Heading 4] Skills WHII The student will apply history and social science skills to the content by
u942 selecting and synthesizing evidence from information sources including, but not limited to artifacts, primary and secondary sources, charts, graphs, and diagrams in events in world history;
u943 applying geographic skills to determine and predict patterns and trends of people, places, and events;
u944 questioning to construct arguments, using evidence from multiple sources;
u945 investigating and analyzing evidence from multiple sources to construct arguments and draw conclusions;
u946 comparing and contrasting historical, cultural, economic, and political perspectives;
u947 determining cause and effect to analyze connections;
u948 using decision-making models including, but not limited to T-charts and Venn diagrams, to analyze and explain the incentives for and consequences of a specific choice;
u949 engaging and communicating as an informed individual with different perspectives;
u950 developing products that reflect an understanding of research and content to make real-life connections; and
u951 contextualizing and corroborating sources for credibility, propaganda, and bias to determine patterns and trends to understand the modern world.
u952 [Heading 3] Emergence of a Global Age
u953 [Heading 4] WHII.1 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze the political, cultural, geographic, and economic conditions in the world around 1500 A.D. by
u954 locating major states and empires;
u955 describing the beliefs, sacred writings, traditions, customs, and growth of major religions including, but not limited to Buddhism, Christianity, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, and Sikhism; and
u956 analyzing major trade patterns, regional and global interactions, and cultural, technological, and scientific exchanges.
u957 [Heading 4] WHII.2 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze the Renaissance and Protestant Reformation in terms of their impacts on western civilization by
u958 explaining the effects of the theological, political, and economic differences that emerged, including the views and actions of Martin Luther, John Calvin, Henry VIII, and Elizabeth I;
u959 describing how the Renaissance and Reformation led to changing cultural values, traditions, and philosophies and the role of the printing press in disseminating these changes; and
u960 describing the effect of religious conflicts on society and government actions including, but not limited to the Inquisition and the Catholic Reformation.
u961 [Heading 4] WHII.3 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe European exploration by
u962 explaining the political, social, cultural, and economic goals of European exploration and colonization;
u963 comparing and contrasting the social, political, economic, and cultural effects of European colonization and the responses of Indigenous people in Africa, Asia, and the Americas; and
u964 analyzing how competition for colonies among Britain, France, and Spain changed the economic system of Europe.
u965 [Heading 3] Age of Revolutions
u966 [Heading 4] WHII.4 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze the political, socio-cultural, geographic, religious, and economic conditions in Europe, Russia, and the Americas that led to political unrest and revolution from approximately 1500 A.D. to about 1800 A.D. by
u967 describing the series of wars in Europe including, but not limited to the French Wars of Religion, the Thirty Years’ War, the German Peasants’ War, the Tudor rebellions, and the Dutch Revolt;
u968 defining and describing how the Scientific Revolution and Enlightenment influenced the European view of the world including, but not limited to the contributions of Descartes, Hume, Kant, Locke, Montesquieu, Newton, Rousseau, and Voltaire;
u969 analyzing Enlightenment themes and how they influenced the political foundations of Virginia and the United States;
u970 describing the Age of Absolutism with emphasis on the development of France and Louis XIV and the Hapsburg empire and Charles V;
u971 describing the development of constitutional monarchy in Great Britain, with emphasis on the English Civil War and the Glorious Revolution and their impacts on democracy;
u972 explaining the influence of the American Revolution on the causes and effects of the French and Latin American revolutions; and
u973 assessing the effect of Napoleon and the Congress of Vienna on political power in Europe.
u974 [Heading 3] Global Interactions
u975 [Heading 4] WHII.5 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand Asia from approximately 1500 A.D. to approximately 1800 A.D. by
u976 describing the location and development of previously established trade routes, the economic success, the influence of religion, and the factors contributing to the longevity of the Ottoman Empire’s influence and power;
u977 describing the location and development of northern and southern empires in India including, but not limited to the major trading posts, the growth of Sikhism challenging the Mughal Empire, and cultural developments;
u978 describing the location, origins, and development of China including, but not limited to the expansion, development, and social and cultural patterns within the Ming and Qing (Manchu) dynasties; and
u979 describing the location, origins, and development of Japan including, but not limited to the incentives and consequences of the Tokugawa shogunate’s closed-country policy, the roles of important figures in Japanese society, such as the emperor and the shogun, and the importance of religion in Japanese society.
u980 [Heading 4] WHII.6 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand sub-Saharan Africa from approximately 1500 A.D. to approximately 1800 A.D. by
u981 describing the location and development of eastern and western Africa;
u982 explaining the influence of Askia Muhammad I in the region;
u983 analyzing the role of religion in eastern and western Africa, including Islam in Songhai, Coptic Christianity in Ethiopia, and Animism in the Songhai and Asante (Ashanti) empires;
u984 analyzing the role of the Ashanti and other powerful western African empires in the Transatlantic Slave Trade;
u985 examining the Swahili trade network and its impacts on eastern Africa;
u986 comparing and contrasting the development of Central and Southern Africa including, but not limited to the political systems of the Songhai, Asante (Ashanti), Kongo, and Zulu empires;
u987 analyzing the adoption of African Christianity in Kongo and comparing it to the practice of Indigenous religions in the Zulu Empire; and
u988 identifying trading partners, resources, and products exchanged with major central and southern African empires.
u989 [Heading 4] WHII.7 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze the global impact of changes in European nations between 1800 and 1900 by
u990 explaining the roles of resources, capital, and entrepreneurship in developing an industrial economy;
u991 analyzing the effects of the First Industrial Revolution and the Second Industrial Revolution;
u992 evaluating responses to imperialism including, but not limited to the Indian Rebellion of 1857 (Sepoy Mutiny) and the Boxer Rebellion;
u993 explaining the events related to the unification of Italy and the role of Italian nationalism; and
u994 explaining the events related to the unification of Germany and the role of Otto von Bismarck.
u995 [Heading 3] Era of Global Wars
u996 [Heading 4] WHII.8 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand World War I by
u997 explaining economic and political causes and identifying major events and leaders of the war including, but not limited to the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand, and the role of Georges Clemenceau, John J. Pershing, Kaiser Friedrich Wilhelm II, and Woodrow Wilson;
u998 identifying the changes to modern warfare exemplified in battles along the Eastern Front and the Western Front;
u999 describing major battles including, but not limited to Gallipoli, Marne, Meuse-Argonne, Somme, and Verdun;
u1000 analyzing and explaining the terms of the Treaty of Versailles, the actions of the League of Nations, and the mandate system;
u1001 identifying the causes and consequences of the Russian Revolution;
u1002 explaining the causes and effects of worldwide economic depression in the 1930s; and
u1003 examining the rise of totalitarianism.
u1004 [Heading 4] WHII.9 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand World War II by
u1005 explaining economic and political causes and identifying major events and leaders of the war including, but not limited to Winston Churchill, Dwight Eisenhower, Adolf Hitler, Michinomiya Hirohito, Joseph Stalin, Douglas MacArthur, Franklin D. Roosevelt, Harry Truman, and Admiral Chester Nimitz;
u1006 describing the major battles including, but not limited to Leningrad, Midway, Normandy, Okinawa, and Stalingrad;
u1007 identifying the role of technology in the war including, but not limited to naval power, cavity magnetron and radar, computers (i.e., the Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer [ENIAC]), antibiotics, and the atomic bomb;
u1008 describing key causes, events, victims, and impacts of the Holocaust, including antisemitism, the rise of the Nazi Party, Kristallnacht, the establishment of ghettos, concentration and death camps, mobile killing squads, rescue, Jewish resistance, and liberation;
u1009 examining the effects of the war, with emphasis on the terms of the peace, the war crimes trials, the division of Europe, plans to rebuild Germany and Japan, the creation of international cooperative organizations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948), and the creation and defense of the modern state of Israel; and
u1010 describing the heroic aspects including, but not limited to D-Day, the French Resistance, the Dunkirk Evacuation, covert action, and Operation Jedburgh.
u1011 [Heading 3] Era of Global Change
u1012 [Heading 4] WHII.10 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the significance of the Cold War during the second half of the 20th century by
u1013 explaining the causes, the domino theory, the role of containment, and the differences between the United States’ and Soviet Union’s economic and political systems;
u1014 describing the events, conflicts, and revolutionary movements including, but not limited to the Berlin Blockade, the Suez Canal Crisis, the Hungarian Revolution, the Bay of Pigs, the Cuban Missile Crisis, and the Prague Spring, as well as the impact of clandestine operations on the Cold War;
u1015 describing conflicts, events, and major leaders in Asia, including Mao Zedong, Chiang Kai-shek, Deng Xiaoping, Ho Chi Minh, and Tiananmen Square;
u1016 explaining the collapse of communism in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe and the end of the Cold War, including the actions of Mikhail Gorbachev, Pope John Paul II, Ronald Reagan, Margaret Thatcher, and Václav Havel;
u1017 examining the political and economic causes and global consequences of the breakup of the Soviet Union; and
u1018 analyzing how nations around the world developed a culture of global interdependence.
u1019 [Heading 4] WHII.11 The student will apply history and social science skills to identify the political, economic, and socioeconomic aspects of independence movements and decolonization by
u1020 describing the struggles for self-rule, including Gandhi’s leadership and the development of India’s democracy;
u1021 describing African independence movements in Ghana, Algeria, Kenya, and South Africa including, but not limited to Jomo Kenyatta’s leadership of Kenya and Nelson Mandela’s role in South Africa;
u1022 describing the end of the League of Nations’ mandate system and the creation of states in the Middle East, including the roles of Golda Meir and Gamal Abdel Nasser; and
u1023 explaining the effects of decolonization and other methods of gaining independence.
u1024 [Heading 4] WHII.12 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain global changes during the late 20th and early 21st centuries by
u1025 identifying modern era genocides and crimes against humanity including, but not limited to Mao’s Cultural Revolution, the Stalin regime, Armenia, Cambodia, Fidel Castro’s Cuba, Darfur, Rwanda, and China’s minority Uyghur population;
u1026 identifying contemporary economic and political issues and ethnic and religious conflicts resulting in the migrations of refugees;
u1027 examine the development, role, and effects of technology, including social media and chemical and biological technologies;
u1028 analyzing the increasing impact, events, and conditions that have given rise to international terrorism including, but not limited to the U.S. Embassy bombing in Beirut, the Lockerbie Bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, the U.S. Embassy bombings in Nairobi, Kenya, and the 2011 Breivik shootings; and
u1029 describing economic interdependence, including the rise of multinational corporations, international organizations, and trade agreements.
u1030 [Heading 2] Grade 11: Virginia and United States History
u1031 The standards for Virginia and United States History expand upon the foundational knowledge and skills previously introduced to include the historical development of American ideas and institutions from the Age of Exploration to the present. While continuing to focus on political, geographic, and economic history, the standards provide students with a basic knowledge of American culture through a chronological survey of major issues, movements, people, and events in Virginia and United States history. As a foundation to develop historical thinking skills, students will apply social science skills to understand the challenges facing the development of the United States. These skills will support the investigation and evaluation of the fundamental political principles, events, people, and ideas that developed and fostered our American identity and led to our country’s prominence in world affairs.
u1032 [Heading 3] Skills
u1033 [Heading 4] Skills VUS The student will apply history and social science skills to the content by
u1034 selecting and synthesizing evidence from information sources including, but not limited to artifacts, primary and secondary sources, charts, graphs, and diagrams, to question and understand information about events in Virginia and United States history;
u1035 applying geographic skills to determine and/or predict patterns and trends of people, places, and events;
u1036 questioning and using inquiry to construct arguments, using evidence from multiple sources;
u1037 investigating and analyzing evidence from multiple sources to construct arguments and draw conclusions;
u1038 comparing and contrasting historical, cultural, economic, and political perspectives;
u1039 determining cause and effect to analyze connections;
u1040 using economic decision-making models to analyze and explain the incentives for and consequences of a specific choice;
u1041 engaging and communicating as an informed individual with different perspectives;
u1042 developing products that reflect an understanding of research and content to make real-life connections; and
u1043 contextualizing corroborating and evaluating sources for credibility, propaganda, and bias to determine patterns and trends in Virginia and United States history.
u1044 [Heading 3] Early America through the Founding of the New Nation
u1045 [Heading 4] VUS.1 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe early North America by
u1046 distinguishing how different Indigenous People of North America used available resources to develop their culture, language, skills, and perspectives including, but not limited to the nations in the Northeast, the Mississippi River Valley, the Atlantic seaboard, the Pacific coast, and the Southwest of North America;
u1047 describing the entrepreneurial characteristics of early explorers including, but not limited to Christopher Columbus, Francisco Vázquez de Coronado, and Ponce de León and the technological developments that made nautical exploration possible;
u1048 connecting the aims, obstacles, and accomplishments of the explorers and sponsors of key expeditions to the Spanish Reconquista, the Protestant Reformation, and the Counter-Reformation; and
u1049 examining the trade routes, resources, and products that linked Africa, the West Indies, the American colonies, and Europe.
u1050 [Heading 4] VUS.2 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the political, religious, social, and economic characteristics of the first thirteen colonies by
u1051 describing the reasons for establishing colonies in North America and the individuals and groups involved including, but not limited to John Smith, Roger Williams, William Penn, Lord Baltimore, William Bradford, and John Winthrop;
u1052 describing European settlement in the Americas; the Great Awakening; the character, practices, and growth of religious toleration; and the free exercise of religion;
u1053 describing the development of political self-government and a free-market economic system, as well as the differences among the British, Spanish, and French colonial systems; and
u1054 explaining the early democratic ideas and practices that emerged during the colonial period, including the significance of representative assemblies and town councils.
u1055 [Heading 4] VUS.3 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain the development of African American culture in America and the impact of the institution of slavery by
u1056 [Heading 4] describing the diverse cultures, languages, skills, and perspectives of Africans who were captured there and enslaved in the Americas;
u1057 [Heading 4] describing the Middle Passage, the Transatlantic Slave Trade, chattel slavery, indentured servitude, and forced labor;
u1058 [Heading 4] describing the slave trade in the U.S., Virginia, and Richmond;
u1059 [Heading 4] analyzing the growth of the colonial economy that maximized profits through the use of indentured servitude and race-based enslavement of Africans; and
u1060 [Heading 4] examining the cultures of enslaved Africans and identifying the various ways they persisted towards freedom.
u1061 [Heading 4] VUS.4 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze the cooperation and conflict between the Indigenous people and the new settlers by
u1062 describing the competition among the English, French, Spanish, Dutch, and Indigenous people for control of North America;
u1063 describing the cooperation that existed at times between the colonists and Indigenous people during the 1600s and 1700s including, but not limited to agriculture, the fur trade, military alliances, treaties, and cultural interchanges;
u1064 describing the significance of Bacon’s Rebellion;
u1065 explaining the conflicts before the Revolutionary War; and
u1066 describing the violent conflicts among the Indigenous nations, including the competing claims for control of lands.
u1067 [Heading 4] VUS.5 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the issues and events leading to and during the revolutionary period by
u1068 describing the results of the French and Indian War;
u1069 describing how political, religious, and economic ideas and interests contributed to the start of the American Revolution including, but not limited to the resistance to imperial policy, the Stamp Act, the Townsend Acts, taxes on tea, the Coercive Acts, the Boston Tea Party, the Boston Massacre, Patrick Henry’s “Give Me Liberty, or Give Me Death” speech, the Battles of Lexington and Concord, the Battle of Bunker Hill, the Second Continental Congress and the Olive Branch Petition, and Thomas Paine’s Common Sense;
u1070 describing efforts by individuals and groups to mobilize support for the American Revolution, including the Minutemen, the Sons of Liberty, the First and Second Continental Congresses, and the Committees of Correspondence;
u1071 examining the contributions of those involved in the drafting and signing of the Declaration of Independence and the lasting legacy of the document;
u1072 analyzing the intervention of France and other factors that led to colonial victory in the Revolutionary War;
u1073 evaluating how key principles in the Declaration of Independence grew in importance to become unifying ideas of American political philosophy; and
u1074 analyzing the contributions of the future U.S. presidents that were significant during this era.
u1075 [Heading 4] VUS.6 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the development and significance of the American political system by
u1076 examining founding documents to explore the development of American constitutional government, with emphasis on the significance of the Virginia Declaration of Rights and the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom in the framing of the Bill of Rights;
u1077 identifying the strengths and weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation;
u1078 describing the major compromises necessary to produce the Constitution of the United States, with emphasis on the struggles of ratification, the reasons for the Bill of Rights, and the roles of James Madison, Alexander Hamilton, George Mason, John Adams, and George Washington;
u1079 comparing the powers granted through the Constitution to citizens, Congress, the president, and the Supreme Court with those reserved to the states;
u1080 analyzing the issues and debates over the role of the federal government and the formation of political parties during the early National Era; and
u1081 explaining the significance of Chief Justice John Marshall and the Marbury v. Madison decision.
u1082 [Heading 3] Expansion, Civil War, and Reconstruction
u1083 [Heading 4] VUS.7 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze major events in Virginia and United States history during the first half of the 19th century by
u1084 assessing the political and economic changes that occurred during this period, with emphasis on James Madison and the War of 1812;
u1085 explaining the role of broken treaties and the factors that led to military defeat of Indigenous people including, but not limited to the resistance of Indigenous nations to encroachments and assimilation and the Trail of Tears;
u1086 explaining the influence and achievements of significant leaders of the time including, but not limited to John Marshall, Andrew Jackson, Chief Tecumseh, Chief Logan, Chief John Ross, and Sequoyah;
u1087 analyzing the United States' subsequent actions with respect to its Indigenous people including, but not limited to the Indian Reorganization Acts and McGirt v. Oklahoma;
u1088 describing the political results of territorial expansion and its impact on Indigenous people;
u1089 analyzing the social and cultural changes during the period including, but not limited to immigration and “The Age of the Common Man” (Jacksonian Era);
u1090 examining the Texas Revolution and the Mexican-American War; and
u1091 evaluating the cultural, economic, and political issues that divided the nation including the role of slavery, the abolitionist movements, and tariffs in the conflicts that led to the Civil War.
u1092 [Heading 4] VUS.8 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze the development and abolition of slavery in the United States by
u1093 explaining how slavery is the antithesis of freedom;
u1094 describing the impacts of abolitionists including, but not limited to Sojourner Truth, William Lloyd Garrison, Frederick Douglass, and Harriet Beecher Stowe;
u1095 analyzing key policies and actions including, but not limited to the Missouri Compromise, the Compromise of 1850, the Kansas-Nebraska Act, Dred Scott v. Sandford, and the Emancipation Proclamation; and
u1096 explaining the extension of rights provided in the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments to the Constitution of the United States.
u1097 [Heading 4] VUS.9 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze the major turning points of the Civil War and Reconstruction eras by
u1098 describing major events and the roles of key leaders of the Civil War Era including, but not limited to Abraham Lincoln, Jefferson Davis, Ulysses S. Grant, Robert E. Lee, and Frederick Douglass;
u1099 evaluating and explaining the significance and development of Abraham Lincoln’s leadership and political statements including, but not limited to the significance of the Emancipation Proclamation and the principles outlined in the Gettysburg Address;
u1100 evaluating and explaining the impact of the war on Americans, with emphasis on Virginians, enslaved and free Blacks, the common soldier, and the home front;
u1101 evaluating postwar Reconstruction plans presented by key leaders of the Civil War;
u1102 evaluating and explaining the political and economic impact of the war and Reconstruction, including the adoption of the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments to the Constitution of the United States; sharecropping; the Freedmen’s Bureau; and the rise of white supremacist groups;
u1103 evaluating Virginia’s stance on the Fourteenth Amendment, Virginia’s 1870 Constitution, and readmittance to Congress; and
u1104 evaluating the role of the biracial Readjuster party in Virginia during Reconstruction in providing funds to expand a system of public schools and expanding employment opportunities for African Americans.
u1105 [Heading 3] Industrialization, Emergence of Modern America, and World Conflicts
u1106 VUS.10 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze how the nation grew and changed from the end of Reconstruction through the early 20th century by
u1107 analyzing the effects of westward movement and the admission of new states on the Indigenous people and the conflicts with the U.S. government including, but not limited to the Battle of Little Bighorn and the Battle of Wounded Knee;
u1108 examining and evaluating the motivations, contributions, and challenges immigrants to the United States faced before, during, and upon arrival;
u1109 analyzing the transformation of the American economy from agrarian to industrial, the growth of cities and trade, the role of the railroads and communication systems, and the concentration of wealth and mass production that created goods at cheaper and faster rates including, but not limited to industrial leaders such as Andrew Carnegie, Andrew Mellon, and John D. Rockefeller and the growth of American philanthropy;
u1110 explaining the social and cultural impact of industrialization including, but not limited to rapid urbanization, the effects on living and working conditions, the development of labor unions, and the emergence of more leisure time and activities;
u1111 evaluating and explaining the Progressive Movement and the impact of its legislation including, but not limited to regulations for pollution, child labor, and food safety;
u1112 examining the “Byrd machine” and its dominance in Virginia government in the first half of the 20th century;
u1113 analyzing the effects of prejudice, discrimination, and “Jim Crow” laws including, but not limited to the responses of Booker T. Washington and W.E.B. DuBois, lynching and racial terror, race riots, the suppression of voting rights in Virginia and other Southern states, Ida B. Wells-Barnett’s anti-lynching crusade, the practice of eugenics, and the Buck v. Bell (1927) decision; and
u1114 explaining the emergence of public colleges, historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs), and land-grant institutions in Virginia and the United States as a way to expand educational opportunities and build specific skills and knowledge in agricultural and technological advances.
u1115 [Heading 4] VUS.11 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze the emerging role of the United States in world affairs during the end of the 19th and early 20th centuries by
u1116 explaining changes in foreign policy of the United States toward Latin America and Asia and the growing influence of the United States including, but not limited to the impact of the Spanish-American War;
u1117 explaining the international significance of U.S. decisions and actions including, but not limited to the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine, the Spanish-American War, the acquisition of Alaska and Hawaii, and the Panama Canal construction;
u1118 evaluating the events, leaders, and changes that brought America out of a period of isolationism to enter World War I;
u1119 evaluating the United States’ involvement in World War I including, but not limited to Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen Points and the establishment of the League of Nations; and
u1120 evaluating and explaining the terms of the Treaty of Versailles including, but not limited to the national debate in response to the formation of the League of Nations.
u1121 VUS.12 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand key international and domestic events, interests, and philosophies of the 1920s and 1930s by
u1122 analyzing the attacks on civil liberties including, but not limited to the reemergence of the Ku Klux Klan, the Chicago riot of 1919, the Tulsa Race Massacre and the decimation of Black Wall Street, the institution of redlining, and the resulting racial wealth gaps;
u1123 analyzing the connections between the Bolshevik Revolution and the First Red Scare, anarchist bombings, and the Palmer Raids;
u1124 analyzing the effects of changes in immigration to the United States including, but not limited to the Immigration Act of 1918 and the Immigration Act of 1924;
u1125 examining the purposes of Marcus Garvey’s Back-to-Africa movement, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), and the Anti-Defamation League (ADL);
u1126 analyzing the Roaring 20s, post-wartime effects on the United States economy, how life changed as a result of innovation and inventions, and the diffusion of American popular culture;
u1127 examining the changing role of women in society and in the passage of the Eighteenth Amendment and the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States; and
u1128 examining the Great Migration and its influence on the Harlem Renaissance, prompting new trends in literature, music, and art, and the work of writers including, but not limited to Zora Neale Hurston and Langston Hughes.
u1129 [Heading 4] VUS.13 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the effects of the Great Depression and New Deal policies on the United States by
u1130 explaining the causes of the Great Depression including, but not limited to bank failures, stock purchases on margin, credit, overproduction, high tariffs and protectionism, and the 1929 stock market crash; and
u1131 evaluating and explaining how Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal measures addressed the Great Depression and expanded the government’s role in the economy, its features, and effects.
u1132 [Heading 4] VUS.14 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze the United States’ involvement in World War II by
u1133 comparing and contrasting totalitarianism in Imperial Japan, communist Soviet Union, fascist Italy, and Nazi Germany;
u1134 analyzing the causes and events that led to America’s involvement, including the attack on Pearl Harbor, the U.S. response with Executive Order 9066 and the incarceration of Japanese Americans, and the Supreme Court case Korematsu v. United States;
u1135 identifying the similarities and differences in the strategy, major battles, and impacts of key leaders of the Axis and Allied powers;
u1136 evaluating and explaining the contributions of heroic military units including, but not limited to segregated, minority units, women, and the role of Virginia units in the U.S. war effort;
u1137 describing major battles of World War II, including Midway, Normandy, Iwo Jima, Okinawa, and the Battle of the Bulge, as well as battles in Holland, Italy, and North Africa;
u1138 analyzing the Holocaust, beginning with the history and role of antisemitism in the persecution of Jews, the persecutions of other targeted groups, challenges related to the immigration of Jews, Hitler’s “Final Solution,” liberation, postwar trials, postwar immigration to the United States, and the creation of the modern state of Israel;
u1139 explaining U.S. military intelligence and technology, including island hopping, the Manhattan Project, and the bombings of the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki; and
u1140 describing the significance of the United States’ role in the Allied victory, the Marshall Plan, and the significance of the United Nations.
u1141 [Heading 3] The United States since World War II
u1142 [Heading 4] VUS.15 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze the United States’ foreign policy during the Cold War era by
u1143 explaining the origins and early development of the Cold War and how it changed U.S. foreign policy including, but not limited to the Truman Doctrine and the policy of containment;
u1144 explaining the long-term impact of the Marshall Plan, the formation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Warsaw Pact, and the efforts of the United States to protect western Europe;
u1145 describing events and leaders of the Cold War, including the Bay of Pigs, the Cuban Missile Crisis, John F. Kennedy, and Nikita Khrushchev;
u1146 analyzing the changing role of the United States in Asia, including Korea, Vietnam, and China, and the experiences of refugees from those nations; and
u1147 explaining how U.S. foreign policy pressure, economic power and defense policy, and the assertion of American values led to the end of the Cold War.
u1148 [Heading 4] VUS.16 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze the causes and effects of the Civil Rights Movement by
u1149 analyzing the origins of the Civil Rights Movement, the effects of segregation, and efforts to desegregate schools, transportation, and public areas;
u1150 evaluating and explaining the impact of the Brown v. Board of Education decision and Virginia’s response of Massive Resistance including, but not limited to the roles of Barbara Johns, R.R. Moton High School in Prince Edward County, Thurgood Marshall, and Oliver W. Hill, Sr.;
u1151 evaluating the legacy of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., including "A Letter from a Birmingham Jail,” civil disobedience, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), the “I Have a Dream” speech, and his assassination;
u1152 analyzing key events including, but not limited to the murder of Emmett Till, bus boycotts, Little Rock Central High School desegregation, Greensboro sit-ins, Freedom Rides, Birmingham demonstrations, the 1963 March on Washington, the Freedom Summer, and Selma to Montgomery Marches, with additional emphasis on events in Virginia;
u1153 explaining how the tenets of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), the 1963 March on Washington, the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 had an effect on all Americans; and
u1154 analyzing the effect of the Black Power Movement.
u1155 [Heading 4] VUS.17 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze political and social conditions in the United States during the second half of the 20th century and early 21st century by
u1156 assessing the development of and changes in domestic policies due to Supreme Court decisions and acts of Congress including, but not limited to Brown v. Board of Education, the Federal Highway Act of 1956, the American Indian Movement (AIM), the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act, the Equal Pay Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act, Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, the Marriage Equality Act, Obergefell v. Hodges, Gideon v. Wainwright, Miranda v. Arizona, and Roe v. Wade leading to Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization;
u1157 analyzing key events and conditions that have given rise to terrorism as an attack on democracy and the United States' role in defending democracy including, but not limited to the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center, the 2000 bombing of the USS Cole, attacks on U.S. Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, and the 9/11 attacks on the United States in 2001;
u1158 explaining social movements including, but not limited to the Vietnam War and the rise of the anti-war movement, Woodstock, the rise of the conservative movement and the election of Ronald Reagan, Women's Movement, Gay Rights Movement, Pro-life Movement, and an increased domestic focus on HIV/AIDS, the rise of antisemitism and hate crimes, and domestic terrorism;
u1159 connecting the legacy of the Civil Rights Movement to the election of Barack Obama; and
u1160 explaining scientific and technological changes and evaluating their impact on American culture, including media.
u1161 [Heading 2] Grade 12: Virginia and United States Government
u1162 Standards for Virginia and United States Government define the knowledge that enables citizens to participate effectively in civic and economic life. Students will apply social science skills as a foundation to examine fundamental constitutional principles, the rights and responsibilities of citizenship, political trends and movements, the policy-making process at each level of government, and the characteristics of the United States economy. The standards emphasize an understanding of the duties and responsibilities that facilitate thoughtful and effective participation in the civic life of an increasingly diverse democratic society. The standards also reflect the evolving political and economic roles of Virginia and the United States in the global community.
u1163 [Heading 3] Skills
u1164 [Heading 4] Skills GOVT The student will apply history and social science skills to the content by
u1165 selecting and synthesizing evidence from information sources including, but not limited to artifacts, primary and secondary sources, charts, graphs, and diagrams, to question and understand government and politics;
u1166 applying geographic skills to determine and/or predict patterns and trends;
u1167 questioning and using inquiry to construct arguments, using evidence from multiple sources;
u1168 investigating and analyzing evidence from multiple sources to construct arguments and draw conclusions;
u1169 comparing and contrasting historical, cultural, economic, and political perspectives;
u1170 determining cause and effect to analyze connections;
u1171 using economic decision-making models to analyze and explain the incentives for and consequences of a specific choice;
u1172 engaging and communicating as an informed individual with persons with different perspectives;
u1173 developing products that reflect an understanding of research and content to make real-life connections; and
u1174 contextualizing, corroborating, and evaluating sources for credibility, propaganda, and bias to determine patterns and trends in Virginia and United States government and politics.
u1175 [Heading 3] Foundations of American Constitutional Government
u1176 [Heading 4] GOVT.1 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the foundations of American constitutional government by
u1177 describing the features of a democratic republic as influenced by forms of Athenian democracy and the Roman Republic;
u1178 analyzing the foundational principles found in historic writings and prior governing documents, including the Magna Carta, charters of the Virginia Company of London (April 10, 1606; May 23, 1609; and March 12, 1612), the works of Enlightenment philosophers (Locke, Hobbes, Rousseau, and others), the Great Awakening, and the English Bill of Rights;
u1179 evaluating the foundational principles expressed in the Constitution of Virginia, the Declaration of Independence, the Articles of Confederation, and the Constitution of the United States; and
u1180 analyzing George Mason’s Virginia Declaration of Rights, Thomas Jefferson’s Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom, and James Madison’s leadership role in securing adoption of the Bill of Rights by the First Congress.
u1181 [Heading 4] GOVT.2 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the concept of democracy by
u1182 explaining the concepts of popular sovereignty, natural rights, the rule of law, self-government, and consent of the governed;
u1183 comparing structures of government including constitutional republic, autocracy, direct democracy, representative democracy, the presidential system, and the parliamentary system;
u1184 recognizing the equality of all citizens under the law;
u1185 recognizing majority rule and minority rights;
u1186 recognizing the necessity of compromise; and
u1187 recognizing the freedom of the individual.
u1188 [Heading 4] GOVT.3 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze the Constitution of Virginia and the Constitution of the United States and the Bill of Rights by
u1189 examining the ratification debates and the Federalist Papers including, but not limited to No. 10 and No. 51;
u1190 evaluating the purposes for government stated in the Preamble;
u1191 defining the structure and authority of the national government as outlined in Article I, Article II, and Article III;
u1192 examining the differences between the powers and authority of state and national governments;
u1193 connecting the fundamental principles of checks and balances and separation of powers to the three branches of government;
u1194 describing how the Bill of Rights affirms natural rights as something that precedes politics; and
u1195 explaining the amendment process.
u1196 [Heading 4] GOVT.4 The student will apply history and social science skills to explore and understand the significance, reverence, and pride around the foundation of the American republic by
u1197 analyzing the five values of liberty, egalitarianism, individualism, populism, and laissez-faire government as described by Alexis de Tocqueville;
u1198 understanding the meaning and historical significance of the mottos "E Pluribus Unum" and "In God We Trust";
u1199 describing the fundamental concepts of American constitutional democracy, including how the government derives its power from the people, and the primacy of individual liberty;
u1200 defining the meaning of the American Creed that calls on citizens to safeguard the liberty of individual Americans within a unified nation, to respect the rule of law, and to preserve the Constitution; and
u1201 evaluating how the Constitution of the United States and the Bill of Rights protect freedoms and limit government.
u1202 [Heading 4] GOVT.5 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain the rights and responsibilities of United States citizenship by
u1203 describing the paths to U.S. citizenship;
u1204 obeying the law and paying taxes;
u1205 serving as a juror;
u1206 participating in the political process and voting in local, state, and national elections;
u1207 performing public service;
u1208 keeping informed about current issues;
u1209 practicing personal and fiscal responsibility; and
u1210 understanding that the United States has a voluntary military and the importance of Selective Service registration.
u1211 [Heading 3] Elections
u1212 [Heading 4] GOVT.6 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain the process of local, state, and national elections by
u1213 describing how amendments and laws have extended the right to vote to previously disenfranchised Americans;
u1214 examining campaign finance laws and campaign funding and spending, including the impact of Supreme Court decisions, the nationalization of campaign financing, and the role of interest groups;
u1215 describing the nomination and election process, including the organization and evolving role of political parties and interest groups;
u1216 analyzing the influence of media coverage, campaign advertising, public opinion polls, social media, and digital communications;
u1217 explaining the role of the Electoral College and the impact of reapportionment and redistricting on elections and governance; and
u1218 evaluating challenges of the election process, including redistricting and gerrymandering.
u1219 [Heading 4] GOVT.7 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the scope and limits of the powers of the legislative branch of the federal government as delineated in Article I of the Constitution of the United States by
u1220 describing its structure and the process for the election of its members;
u1221 describing how the power of the legislative branch has changed over time; and
u1222 evaluating how the processes of the legislative branch reflect the democratic principles of American constitutional government.
u1223 [Heading 4] GOVT.8 The student will apply history and science skills to describe the scope and limits of the powers of the executive branch of the federal government as delineated in Article II of the Constitution of the United States by
u1224 describing the structure and organization of the executive branch;
u1225 describing how the power of the executive branch has changed over time, including the Twentieth, Twenty-second, and Twenty-fifth Amendments; and
u1226 comparing and contrasting executive branch processes with those of the legislative branch.
u1227 [Heading 4] GOVT.9 The student will apply history and social science skills to describe the scope and limits of the powers of the federal judiciary as delineated in Article III of the Constitution of the United States by
u1228 describing the organization, jurisdiction, and proceedings of federal courts;
u1229 explaining how the Marshall Court established the Supreme Court as an independent branch of government in Marbury v. Madison;
u1230 describing how the Supreme Court decides cases; and
u1231 comparing the philosophy of originalism, judicial pragmatism, judicial activism, and judicial restraint.
u1232 [Heading 3] State and Local Government
u1233 [Heading 4] GOVT.10 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain the organization and powers of the state and local governments as described in the Constitution of Virginia by
u1234 analyzing legislative, executive, and judicial branches;
u1235 explaining the law-making process at the state and local levels;
u1236 examining the structure and powers of local governments (county, city, and town);
u1237 analyzing the relationship between state and local governments and the roles of regional authorities, governing boards, and commissions;
u1238 comparing partisan and nonpartisan offices; and
u1239 investigating and explaining the ways individuals and groups exert influence on state and local governments.
u1240 [Heading 4] GOVT.11 The student will apply history and social science skills to analyze civil liberties and civil rights by
u1241 explaining the difference between civil rights and civil liberties;
u1242 explaining the purpose of the Bill of Rights, with emphasis on First Amendment freedoms;
u1243 analyzing the rights of the accused and due process of law expressed in the Bill of Rights and the Fourteenth Amendment;
u1244 explaining how the Supreme Court has applied most of the protections of the Bill of Rights to the states through a process of selective incorporation;
u1245 evaluating the balance between individual liberties and the public interest; and
u1246 examining how civil liberties and civil rights are protected under the law.
u1247 [Heading 4] GOVT.12 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the role of the United States in a changing world by
u1248 describing the responsibilities of the federal government for foreign policy and national security;
u1249 assessing and analyzing the role of national interest in shaping foreign policy and promoting world peace; and
u1250 examining the relationship of Virginia and the United States in the global economy, including trends in international trade.
u1251 [Heading 4] GOVT.13 The student will apply history and social science skills to understand the role of the United States in a changing world by
u1252 evaluating the economic and political systems of capitalism, communism, Marxism, socialism, fascism, authoritarianism, and totalitarianism;
u1253 comparing the characteristics of economies as described by Adam Smith, Karl Marx, John Maynard Keynes, Friedrich Hayek, Milton Friedman, and Thomas Sowell;
u1254 comparing and contrasting capitalism and socialism as economic systems, including the role of government and individual economic freedoms;
u1255 explaining the differences between the principles of the Bill of Rights and the Communist Manifesto;
u1256 evaluating the factors that influence production and distribution of goods in a market system; and
u1257 explaining how competition and free enterprise influence the local, national, and global economies.
u1258 [Heading 3] The Role of the Government in the Economy
u1259 [Heading 4] GOVT.14 The student will apply history and social science skills to explain the role of government in the Virginia and United States economies by
u1260 explaining government’s limited but important role in free enterprise and how that affects individual economic freedoms;
u1261 describing the provision of government goods and services that are not readily produced by the market;
u1262 evaluating government’s establishment and maintenance of the rules and institutions in which markets operate, including the establishment and enforcement of property rights, contracts, consumer rights, labor-management relations, environmental protection, and competition in the marketplace;
u1263 investigating and describing the types and purposes of taxation that are used by local, state, and federal governments to pay for services provided by the government;
u1264 analyzing how Congress can use fiscal policy to stabilize the economy;
u1265 describing how the Federal Reserve can use monetary policy to pursue price stability, full employment, and economic growth with the goal of stabilizing the economy; and
u1266 evaluating the trade-offs in government decisions.
