=== page 1 ===
u1 SOCIAL STUDIES
u2 Introduction The great architects of American public education, such as Thomas Jefferson, Horace Mann, and John Dewey, believed that every student must be well versed in our nation's history, the principles and practices which support and sustain citizenship, and the institutions that define our government. Understandings of commerce and geography were critical to their thinking as well. In essence, Jefferson, Mann, and Dewey viewed the study of social studies as critical to the mission of public schools. According to the National Council for the Social Studies: advocates of citizenship education cross the political spectrum, but they are bound by a common belief that our democratic republic will not sustain unless students are aware of their changing cultural and physical environments; know the past; read, write, and think deeply; and act in ways that promote the common good. (C3 Framework for Social Studies, 2013). A strong Social Studies education depends upon a clear understanding of its interrelated disciplines and inclusion of Maine’s Guiding Principles. Without knowledge of the geography and economics of earlier times, history offers only lists of people, events, and dates. Without knowledge of history, the institutions of American government and the dynamics of today's global economy are difficult to understand. Although social studies curricula vary in their breadth and depth, the Social Studies Standards reflect a focus on government, history, geography, personal finance and economics as the pillars of the content, with other disciplines within the social sciences deemed important, but not essential. Guiding Principles The Guiding Principles guide education in Maine and should be reflected throughout Social Studies curriculum. Examples of how students can show evidence of those guiding principles in Social Studies may include:
u3 A. Clear and Effective Communicator: Students research and use background knowledge to give audiovisual presentations
u4 about current and historical issues.
u5 B. Self-Directed and Lifelong Learner: Students generate questions and explore primary and secondary sources to answer
u6 those questions while demonstrating a growth mindset.
u7 C. Creative and Practical Problem Solver: Students draw conclusions about current and historical problems using valid research
u8 and critical thinking. D. Responsible and Involved Citizen: Students practice and apply the duties of citizenship through the exercise of constitutional
u9 rights.
=== page 2 ===
u10 E. Integrative and Informed Thinker: Students compare and contrast to analyze point of view and differentiate between reliable
u11 and unreliable primary and secondary sources. Performance Expectations that include the application of the Guiding Principles through Social Studies knowledge and skills are denoted in the standards with an asterisk (*). Skills in Social Studies: The application of skills in Social Studies is crucial to any curriculum. Best practices in Social Studies reflect curriculum, instruction, and assessment that give students opportunities to demonstrate research and develop positions on current Social Studies issues. Students will be asked to identify key words and concepts related to research questions and locate and access information by using text features. Additionally, students will demonstrate facility with note-taking, organizing information, and creating bibliographies. Students will distinguish between primary and secondary sources as well as evaluate and verify the credibility of the information found in print and non-print sources. Equally important is that students use additional sources to resolve contradictory information. Key Ideas in the Social Studies Standards: Growth mindset - Our mindset includes beliefs about our abilities and qualities that include intelligence, creativity or musicality. Having a growth mindset means that students know that their abilities and strengths can change or develop, and that those changes are within their control. Understand - The word “understand” appears in performance expectations throughout the Social Studies Standards. It refers to a variety of different levels of thinking and was used intentionally to serve as an umbrella term for the cognitive demand that is described by the descriptors beneath the performance expectations. Look to the grade level expectation for grades K-5 or to the grade span expectations in spans 6-8 and 9-12 (Foundational or Developmental as noted by “F” or “D”) to define the level of cognitive demand for student performance. Various -The Social Studies Standards refer to “various" peoples, nations, regions of the world, historical eras, and enduring themes. School administrative units should develop a local curriculum that assists students in gaining a coherent, broad perspective on a variety of peoples, nations, regions, historical eras, and enduring themes. Major Enduring Themes - The term “major enduring themes” is used in several places in the Social Studies Standards. This term refers to general topics or issues that have been relevant over a long period of time. Using a consistent set of themes can serve as a framework within which other concepts, topics, and facts can be organized. It can also help students make connections between events within and across historical eras, and use history to help make informed decisions. The Civics and Government, Personal Finance and Economics, Geography, and History Standards all include performance expectations that address individual, cultural, international, and global connections. It will be up to the School Administrative Units to determine whether they use these performance expectations as an opportunity to integrate across the disciplines of the social studies or address them separately. The “enduring themes,” some of which overlap, include:
=== page 3 ===
u12 • Freedom and Justice • Conflict and Compromise • Technology and Innovation • Unity and Diversity • Continuity and Change Over Time • Supply and Demand Eras – School Administrative Units (SAU) should develop a coherent curriculum that provides students with a balanced exposure to the major eras of United States and World History. The term “various eras” in this document refers to those eras that are selected by an SAU to build a cohesive, balanced understanding. The “eras,” some of which overlap, include:
u13 [T1 R1 C1] Eras in United States History*
u14 [T1 R1 C2] Eras in World History*
u15 [T1 R2 C1] 1. Beginnings to 1607: Migration, contact, and exchange between Native Americans, Africans, and Europeans. 2. 1607 to 1754: Conflict and competition -- Europeans and Native Americans; emergence of distinctive Colonial and Native societies. 3. 1754 to 1800: Social, political, and economic tensions -- Revolution and the Early National Period. 4. 1800 to 1848: Defining and extending democratic ideals during rapid economic, territorial, and demographic changes. 5. 1844 to 1877: Regional tensions and civil war. 6. 1865 to 1898: Move from agricultural to industrialized society. 7. 1890 to 1945: Domestic and global challenges; debate over Government’s role and the role of the US in the world. 8. 1945 to 1980: Challenges with prosperity, living up to ideals, and unfamiliar international responsibilities. 9. 1980 to present: Cultural debates, adaptation to economic globalization and revolutionary changes in science and technology. *All eras are circa.
u16 [T1 R2 C2] 1. Beginnings to 600 BCE: Technological and environmental transformations. 2. 600 BCE to 600 CE: Organization and reorganization of human societies. 3. 600 to 1450: Regional and interregional interactions. 4. 1450 to 1750: Political, social, economic and global interactions led to revolutions. 5. 1750 to 1900: Industrialization and global integration. 6. 1900 to present: Accelerating global change and realignments.
u17 Spiraling K-12 - A course of study in which students will see the same topics throughout their school career, with each encounter increasing in complexity and reinforcing previous learning. The Social Studies Standards and performance expectations have been created in order to reflect a progression of increasing complexity from K-5 and between the 6-8, and 9-diploma grade spans.
=== page 4 ===
u18 Maine Statutes Related to Social Studies Title 20-A: Education §4722. High school diploma standards. 1. Minimum instructional requirements. A comprehensive program of instruction must include a minimum 4-year program that meets the curriculum requirements established by this chapter and any other instructional requirements established by the commissioner and the school board. [2009, c. 313, §15 (AMD).] 2. Required subjects. Courses in the following subjects shall be provided in separate or integrated study programs to all students and required for a high school diploma: …. Social studies and history, including American history, government, civics and personal finance-- 2 years; [2013, c. 244, §1 (AMD).] Title 20-A MRSA §4706, as amended by PL 1991, c. 655, §4, is further amended to read: §4706. Instruction in American history, Maine studies and Maine Native American history. The following subjects are required: …. Maine Studies… American History… Maine Native American history (including Maine tribal governments, Maine Native American culture, Maine Native American territories, and Maine Native American economic systems). Maine Native American history and culture must be taught in all elementary and secondary schools, both public and private. Maine Native Americans - The phrase “Maine Native Americans” refers to the four Maine Native American tribes – the Penobscot, the Passamaquoddy, the Micmac, and the Maliseet.
=== page 5 === [running header: Strand: Geography]
u19 Geography
u20 Grade Level: Kindergarten
u22 Standard: Students draw on concepts and processes from geography to understand issues involving people, places, and environments in the community, Maine, the United States, and the world.
u23 Performance Expectation: Geography 1: Students understand the nature and basic ideas of geography by identifying questions about their world and explaining that geography is the study of the Earth’s surface and peoples. * Geography 2: Students understand the influence of geography on individuals and their immediate surroundings by identifying the impacts of geographic features on individuals and families.
u24 Grade Level: 1st
u26 Standard: Students draw on concepts and processes from geography to understand issues involving people, places, and environments in the community, Maine, the United States, and the world.
u27 Performance Expectation: Geography 1: Students understand the nature and basic ideas of geography by gathering information about their immediate neighborhood and community, including maps, photographs, charts and graphs, and then create visual representations of their findings. * Geography 2: Students understand the influence of geography on communities by identifying the impacts of geographic features on communities.
u28 Grade Level: 2nd
u30 Standard: Students draw on concepts and processes from geography to understand issues involving people, places, and environments in the community, Maine, the United States, and the world.
u31 Performance Expectation: Geography 1: Students understand the nature and basic ideas of geography by using basic maps and globes to identify local and distant places and locations, directions (including N, S, E, and W), and basic physical, environmental, and cultural features. Geography 2: Students understand the influence of geography on individuals and groups in Maine, including Maine Native Americans, the United States and the world by identifying the impacts of geographic features on individuals and groups in those communities.
=== page 6 === [running header: Strand: Geography]
u32 Grade Level: 3rd
u34 Standard: Students draw on concepts and processes from geography to understand issues involving people, places, and environments in the community, Maine, the United States, and the world.
u35 Performance Expectation: Geography 1: Students understand the geography of the community, Maine, the United States, and various regions of the world by explaining that geography includes the study of Earth’s physical features including climate and the distribution of plant, animal, and human life. Geography 2: Students understand geographic aspects of unity and diversity in the community and in Maine, including Maine Native American communities by collecting, evaluating, and organizing information about the impacts of geographic features on the daily life of various cultures, including Maine Native Americans and other cultures and communities. *
u36 Grade Level: 4th
u38 Standard: Students draw on concepts and processes from geography to understand issues involving people, places, and environments in the community, Maine, the United States, and the world.
u39 Performance Expectation: Geography 1: Students understand the geography of the community, Maine, the United States, and various regions of the world by communicating their findings by creating visual representations of the world, showing a basic understanding of the geographic grid, including the equator and prime meridian. * Geography 2: Students understand geographic aspects of unity and diversity in various regions of the United States and the world by describing impacts of geographic features on the daily life of various cultures in the United States and the world.
u40 Grade Level: 5th
u42 Standard: Students draw on concepts and processes from geography to understand issues involving people, places, and environments in the community, Maine, the United States, and the world.
u43 Performance Expectation: Geography 1: Students understand the geography of the community, Maine, the United States, and various regions of the world by identifying the Earth’s major geographic features such as continents, oceans, major
=== page 7 === [running header: Strand: Geography]
u44 mountains, and rivers using a variety of geographic tools including digital mapping tools; and explaining examples of changes in the Earth’s physical features and their impact on communities and regions. Geography 2: Students understand geographic aspects of unity and diversity in the community, Maine, and regions of the United States and the world, including Maine Native American communities, by identifying examples through inquiry of how geographic features unify communities and regions as well as support diversity using print and non-print sources. *
u45 Grade Level: 6-8th
u47 Standard: Students draw on concepts and processes from geography to understand issues involving people, places, and environments in the community, Maine, the United States, and the world.
u48 Performance Expectation: Geography 1: Students understand the geography of the community, Maine, the United States, and various regions of the world and the geographic influences on life in the past, present, and future by: (F1) Using the geographic grid and a variety of types of maps, including digital sources, to locate and access relevant geographic information that reflects multiple perspectives. * (F2) Identifying the major regions of the Earth and their major physical features and political boundaries using a variety of geographic tools including digital tools and resources. * (F3) Evaluating a geographic issue of physical, environmental, or cultural importance. * (D1) Identifying consequences of geographic influences through inquiry and formulating predictions. (D2) Describing the impact of change on the physical and cultural environment. Geography 2: Students understand geographic aspects of unity and diversity in Maine, the United States, and various world cultures, including Maine Native Americans by: (F1) Explaining how geographic features have impacted unity and diversity in Maine, the United States, and other nations. * (D1) Summarizing and interpreting the relationship between geographic features and cultures of Maine Native Americans, and historical and recent immigrant groups in Maine, United States, and the world. *
=== page 8 === [running header: Strand: Geography]
u49 Grade Level: 9th-Diploma
u51 Standard: Students draw on concepts and processes from geography to understand issues involving people, places, and environments in the community, Maine, the United States, and the world.
u52 Performance Expectation: Geography 1: Students understand the geography of the United States and various regions of the world and the effect of geographic influences on decisions about the present and future by: (F1) Analyzing local, national, and global geographic data on physical, environmental, and cultural processes that shape and change places and regions. * (F2) Evaluating and developing a well-supported position about the impact of change on the physical and cultural environment. * (D1) Proposing a solution to a geographic issue that reflects physical, environmental, and cultural features at local, state, national, and global levels. * (D2) Using inquiry to predict and evaluate consequences of geographic influences. (D3) Describing the major regions of the Earth and their major physical, environmental, and cultural features using a variety of geographic tools including digital tools and resources. * Geography 2: Students understand geographic aspects of unity and diversity in Maine, the United States, and the world, including Maine Native American communities by: (F1) Analyzing geographic features that have impacted unity and diversity in the United States and other nations. * (D1) Summarizing and interpreting the relationship between geographic features and cultures of Maine Native Americans, and historical and recent immigrant groups in Maine, the United States, and the world. *
