=== page 1 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u1 (x=211) Arizona
u2 (x=41) History and Social Science Standards
=== page 2 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u5 Introduction An important aspect of our Republic is that an educated and engaged citizenry is vital for the system to work. In a government where the final authority and sovereignty rests with the people, our local, state, and federal governments will only be as responsive as the citizens demand them to be. Preparing students for the contemporary society cannot be accomplished without a strong emphasis on civics, economics, geography, and history – the core disciplines of the social studies. It is imperative that each generation gains an understanding of the knowledge, skills, and dispositions to participate fully in civic life in a rapidly changing world. The Arizona History and Social Science Standards are premised upon a rigorous and relevant K-12 social studies program within each district and school in the state. Engaging students in the pursuit of active, informed citizenship will require a broad range of understandings and skills including: Think analytically by
u6 ● Posing and framing questions ● Gathering a variety of evidence ● Recognizing continuity and detecting change over time ● Utilizing chronology to examine cause and effect relationships ● Drawing and combining reasonable inferences from a variety of sources to build an understanding of complex questions Read widely and critically by
u7 ● Examining, interpreting, and contextualizing primary sources focusing on author, purpose, and audience of each source ● Identifying and comparing historical, geographic, economic, and political science interpretations from a wide variety of secondary sources ● Utilizing broader understanding to discern subtext in primary and secondary sources Communicate cogently and in a compelling manner by
u8 ● Developing and defending evidenced based arguments ● Utilizing multiple perspectives for comprehensive explanations ● Practicing and cultivating a wide variety of diverse types of writing ● Engaging in constructive conversations around history and social science topics
u9 The Arizona History and Social Science Standards, through the emphasis on content knowledge, disciplinary skills, and process and the integration of inquiry elements will prepare Arizona students to engage actively in civic life and meet the needs and challenges of the 21st century.
=== page 3 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u12 K-8 Grade Level Storylines and Content Focus To create a coherent sequence from one grade to the next, to avoid unneeded repetition, and to close content gaps, each elementary grade level has a storyline and content focus for the year. A more detailed storyline can be found later in this document on the specific grade level standards page. This is not the case for the high school standards.
=== page 4 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u15 Core Discipline Descriptors
u16 The content standards are organized under the four core disciplines in social studies. These disciplines - civics, economics, geography, and history - offer a unique way of thinking about and organizing knowledge. Disciplinary skills and processes offer a means for students to verify that knowledge. Descriptions of the core disciplines are included below. The disciplinary skills and processes are described in the next section. Civics The civics standards promote the knowledge, skills, and dispositions necessary for informed, responsible participation in public life. Productive civic engagement requires knowledge of the history, principles, and foundations of our Constitutional Republic and that each person has both human and civil rights. People demonstrate civic engagement when they address public problems individually and collaboratively and when they maintain, strengthen, and improve their communities and society. Civics also requires an understanding of local, state, national, and international institutions. Civics encompasses practices such as voting, volunteering, jury service, contributing to public processes, and the public discourse. Economics (including financial literacy) The economic and financial literacy standards promote the concepts and tools necessary to make reasoned judgements about both personal economic questions and broader questions of economic policy. Economic decision making requires a strong understanding of the ways in which individuals, businesses, governments, and societies make decisions to allocate resources among alternative uses. This process involves the consideration of costs and benefits with the goal of making decisions that will enable individuals and societies to be as well off as possible. The study of economics explains historical developments and patterns, the impacts of trade, and the distribution of income and wealth in local, regional, national, and international economies. Economics also gives students the skills to analyze current issues and public policies. Geography The geography standards promote the use of multiple geographic tools and emphasize geographic reasoning to understand local, national, regional, and global issues. Geographic reasoning rests on deep knowledge of the Earth’s physical and human features including the location of places and regions, the distribution of landforms and bodies of water, and changes in political boundaries. Geography provides an understanding of the Earth’s places and regions, how people with diverse backgrounds interact with their environment and enhances understanding of history, civics, and economics.
u17 History The history standards promote both historical content and historical thinking skills to prepare students to apply historical thinking to any historical era and context. The study of history is vital because it promotes the development of analytical skills, comparative perspectives, and question and answers modes of critical judgement that promote thoughtful work in any field or career. It is vital for students to study both United States and world history, so they can analyze the human experience through time, recognize the relationship of events and people, and interpret significant patterns, themes, ideas, and turning points in American and world history. Students apply the lessons of history to their lives as citizens of the United States and members of the world community.
=== page 5 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u20 Anchor Standards The Arizona History and Social Science Standards are organized into five social studies content areas. Within these content areas are four to five major core concepts referred to as Anchor Standards. Grade level standards are written to support these Anchor Standards. There are twenty-one Anchor Standards. Seventeen of these Anchor Standards center around the content areas of civics, economics, geography, and history. The remaining four standards focus on the disciplinary skills and processes that all students need to know and apply to any historical era, context, or content area. Using these tools, students think like historians, geographers, political scientists, and economists. These skills and processes are especially critical in a time when students are exposed to massive amounts of information in numerous forms and must develop the skills to make sense of it. The Anchor Standards are listed below.
u21 [T1 R1 C2] Disciplinary
u22 [T1 R1 C4] Civics
u23 [T1 R1 C5] Economics
u24 [T1 R1 C6] Geography
u25 [T1 R1 C7] History
u26 [T1 R2 C2] Skills and Processes
u27 [T1 R3 C1] SP1: Chronological reasoning requires understanding processes of change and continuity over time, which means assessing similarities and differences between historical periods and between the past and present.
u28 [T1 R3 C4] C1: Civic virtues and democratic principles are key components of the American political system.
u29 [T1 R3 C5] E1: A financially literate individual understands how to manage income, spending, and investment.
u30 [T1 R3 C6] G1: The use of geographic representations and tools helps individuals understand their world.
u31 [T1 R3 C7] H1: The development of civilizations, societies, cultures, and innovations have influenced history and continue to impact the modern world.
u32 [T1 R4 C1] SP2: Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to identify, compare, and evaluate multiple perspectives about a given event to draw conclusions about that event since there are multiple points of view about events and issues.
u33 [T1 R4 C4] C2: Citizens have individual rights, roles, and responsibilities.
u34 [T1 R4 C5] E2: By applying economic reasoning, individuals seek to understand the decisions of people, groups, and societies.
u35 [T1 R4 C6] G2: Human-environment interactions are essential aspects of human life in all societies.
u36 [T1 R4 C7] H2: Cycles of conflict and cooperation have shaped relations among people, places, and environments.
u37 [T1 R5 C1] SP3: Historians and Social Scientists gather, interpret, and use evidence to develop claims and answer historical, economic, geographical, and political questions and communicate their conclusions.
u38 [T1 R5 C4] C3: An understanding of civic and political institutions in society and the principles these institutions are intended to reflect including knowledge about law, politics, and government are essential to effective citizenship.
u39 [T1 R5 C5] E3: Individuals and institutions are interdependent within market systems.
u40 [T1 R5 C6] G3: Examining human population and movement helps individuals understand past, present, and future conditions on Earth’s surface.
u41 [T1 R5 C7] H3: Economic, political, and religious ideas and institutions have influenced history and continue to shape the modern world.
u42 [T1 R6 C5] E4: The domestic economy is shaped by interactions between government, institutions, and the private sector.
u43 [T1 R7 C1] SP4: Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to analyze relationships among causes and effects and to create and support arguments using relevant evidence.
u44 [T1 R7 C4] C4: Process, rules, and laws direct how individuals are governed and how society addresses problems.
u45 [T1 R7 C5] E5: The interconnected global economy impacts all individuals and groups in significant and varied ways.
u46 [T1 R7 C6] G4: Global interconnections and spatial patterns are a necessary part of geographic reasoning.
u47 [T1 R7 C7] H4: Patterns of social and political interactions have shaped people, places, and events throughout history and continue to shape the modern world.
u48 The twenty-one Anchor Standards are represented within each of the grade bands; K-2, 3-5, 6-8, and high school, but not all Anchor Standards are at each grade level. Specific grade level standards are organized under each of the Anchor Standards.
=== page 6 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u51 [T1 R1 C1] Content Area
u52 [T1 R1 C7] Anchor Standards
u53 [T1 R1 C10] K
u54 [T1 R1 C11] 1
u55 [T1 R1 C12] 2
u56 [T1 R1 C13] 3
u57 [T1 R1 C14] 4
u58 [T1 R1 C15] 5
u59 [T1 R1 C16] 6
u60 [T1 R1 C17] 7
u61 [T1 R1 C18] 8
u62 [T1 R1 C19] HS
u63 [T1 R2 C2] Skills and
u64 [T1 R2 C4] Processes
u65 [T1 R2 C8] SP1: Chronological reasoning requires understanding processes of change and continuity over time, which means
u66 [T1 R3 C8] assessing similarities and differences between historical periods and between the past and present.
u67 [T1 R4 C8] SP2: Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to identify, compare, and evaluate multiple perspectives about
u68 [T1 R5 C8] a given event to draw conclusions about that event since there are multiple points of view about events and issues.
u69 [T1 R6 C8] SP3: Historians and Social Scientists gather, interpret, and use evidence to develop claims and answer historical,
u70 [T1 R7 C8] economic, geographical, and political questions and communicate their conclusions.
u71 [T1 R8 C8] SP4: Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to analyze relationships among causes and effects and to create
u72 [T1 R9 C8] and support arguments using relevant evidence.
u73 [T1 R10 C1] Civics
u74 [T1 R10 C7] C1: Civic virtues and democratic principles are key components of the American political system.
u75 [T1 R11 C7] C2: Citizens have individual rights, roles, and responsibilities.
u76 [T1 R12 C7] C3: An understanding of civic and political institutions in society and the principles these institutions are intended to reflect including knowledge about law, politics, and government are essential to effective citizenship.
u77 [T1 R13 C7] C4: Process, rules, and laws direct how individuals are governed and how society addresses problems.
u78 [T1 R14 C3] Economics
u79 [T1 R14 C7] E1: A financially literate individual understands how to manage income, spending, and investment.
u80 [T1 R15 C7] E2: By applying economic reasoning, individuals seek to understand the decisions of people, groups, and societies.
u81 [T1 R16 C7] E3: Individuals and institutions are interdependent within market systems.
u82 [T1 R17 C7] E4: The domestic economy is shaped by interactions between government, institutions, and the private sector.
u83 [T1 R18 C7] E5: The interconnected global economy impacts all individuals and groups in significant and varied ways.
u84 [T1 R19 C1] Geography
u85 [T1 R19 C7] G1: The use of geographic representations and tools helps individuals understand their world.
u86 [T1 R20 C7] G2: Human-environment interactions are essential aspects of human life in all societies.
u87 [T1 R21 C7] G3: Examining human population and movement helps individuals understand past, present, and future conditions on Earth’s surface.
u88 [T1 R22 C7] G4: Global interconnections and spatial patterns are a necessary part of geographic reasoning.
u89 [T1 R23 C3] History
u90 [T1 R23 C8] H1: The development of civilizations, societies, cultures, and innovations have influenced history and continue to
u91 [T1 R24 C8] impact the modern world.
u92 [T1 R25 C7] H2: Cycles of conflict and cooperation have shaped relations among people, places, and environments.
u93 [T1 R26 C8] H3: Economic, political, and religious ideas and institutions have influenced history and continue to shape the modern
u94 [T1 R27 C8] world.
u95 [T1 R28 C8] H4: Patterns of social and political interactions have shaped people, places, and events throughout history and
u96 [T1 R29 C8] continue to shape the modern world.
=== page 7 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u99 Inquiry Arc Children and adolescents are naturally curious and - in their effort to understand the world around them - have a bottomless well of questions. Learning to investigate questions in the social studies discipline areas results in a deeper understanding of content and a stronger connection to the material. Students must gather and evaluate evidence, formulate arguments, critique counter claims, and communicate their conclusions through many modes including writing, speaking, and visualizing. The six components of the Inquiry Arc are found in the Disciplinary Skills and Processes Anchor standards and appear at each grade level. Incorporating inquiry using the content standards reinforces the same skills and processes contained in the Arizona English Language Arts (ELA) standards. As students utilize inquiry processes in their content area, they reinforce and use the ELA reading, writing, speaking, and listening standards.
u100 The Six Elements of the Inquiry Arc
u101 ● Inquiry Element 1: Developing Compelling Questions Central to a rich social studies experience is the capability for developing questions that can frame and advance inquiry. Those questions come in two forms: compelling and supporting questions. Compelling questions focus on enduring issues and concerns. ● Inquiry Element 2: Constructing Supporting Questions Supporting questions focus on descriptions, definitions, and processes on which there is general agreement within the social studies disciplines and require students to construct explanations that advance claims of understanding in response.
u102 ● Inquiry Element 3: Gathering and Evaluating Sources Students, whether they are constructing opinions, explanations, or arguments, gather information from a variety of sources and evaluate the relevance of the information. In evaluating these sources there are literacy skills, such as identifying an author’s purpose, main idea, and point of view, that will help in evaluating the usefulness of a source.
u103 ● Inquiry Element 4: Developing Claims Once students analyze information, they need to develop claims and counterclaims to answer social studies questions. Evidence is used to support these claims. ● Inquiry Element 5: Communicating Conclusions Students formalize their arguments and explanations and communicate their results through various products to a wide range of audiences. Students also have opportunity to critique their scholarship as well as the scholarship of others. ● Inquiry Element 6: Taking Informed Action To prepare students for civic life, students use their disciplinary knowledge, skills, and perspectives to inquire about problems involved in public issues, deliberate with others on how to define and address these issues, take constructive and collaborative action, and reflect on that action.
=== page 8 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u106 Design of the Arizona History and Social Science Standards The Arizona History and Social Science Standards define the knowledge, understanding, and skills that need to be effectively taught and learned for all students to be ready to succeed in credit-bearing, college-entry courses, in the workplace, in military service, and in civic life as the member of a constitutional republic. The Standards present a vision of what it means to be a civic, economic, geographic, and historically literate person in the 21st century. The Arizona History and Social Science Standards outline what all students need to know, understand, and be able to do by the end of high school and reflect the following guiding principles and shifts for social studies education:
u107 ● Social studies prepares the nation’s youth for college, career, and civic life. ● Inquiry is at the heart of social studies. ● Social studies involves interdisciplinary application and welcomes integration with other content areas. ● Social studies are composed of deep and enduring understandings, concepts, and skills. ● Social studies should have direct and explicit connections to the ELA standards. The Arizona History and Social Science Standards are:
u108 ● Directed in a coherent progression across grades K-12, ● Aligned with college and workforce expectations, ● Focused on rigorous content and applications of knowledge through higher level thinking, ● Research and evidence based, ● Broad in nature, allowing for the widest possible range of student learning, and ● Designed as an integrated approach to content while still maintaining disciplinary integrity. The Arizona History and Social Science Standards are not curriculum or instructional practices. While the Arizona History and Social Science Standards may be used as the basis for a district’s or school’s curriculum, they are not curriculum. Therefore, identifying a sequence of instruction at each grade - what specifically will be taught and for how long - requires concerted effort and attention at the local level. Curricular tools, including textbooks, are selected by the district/school and adopted through local governing board. The Arizona Department of Education defines standards, curriculum, and instruction as:
u109 ● Standards are what a student needs to know, understand, and be able to do by the end of each grade. They build across grade levels in a progression of increasing understanding and through a range of cognitive demand levels. Standards are adopted at the state level by the Arizona State Board of Education. ● Curriculum refers to resources used for teaching and learning the standards. Curricula are adopted at the local level. ● Instruction refers to the methods or methodologies used by teachers to teach their students. Instructional techniques are employed by individual teachers in response to the needs of the students in their classes to help them progress through the curriculum to master the standards. Decisions about instructional practice and techniques are made at a local level.
=== page 9 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u112 The Arizona History and Social Science Standards assume students have regular standards-based social studies instruction every year. The amount of time individual students need to learn these standards will vary. The chart below specifies the expected social studies instructional time necessary for students to learn these standards.
u113 [T1 R1 C1] Grade
u114 [T1 R1 C2] Assumed Minutes per Week
u115 [T1 R1 C3] Assumed Average Minutes per Day
u116 [T1 R2 C1] K
u117 [T1 R2 C2] 90 minutes/week
u118 [T1 R2 C3] 18 minutes/day
u119 [T1 R3 C1] 1
u120 [T1 R3 C2] 150 minutes/week
u121 [T1 R3 C3] 30 minutes/day
u122 [T1 R4 C1] 2
u123 [T1 R4 C2] 150 minutes/week
u124 [T1 R4 C3] 30 minutes/day
u125 [T1 R5 C1] 3
u126 [T1 R5 C2] 200 minutes/week
u127 [T1 R5 C3] 40 minutes/day
u128 [T1 R6 C1] 4
u129 [T1 R6 C2] 225 minutes/week
u130 [T1 R6 C3] 45 minutes/day
u131 [T1 R7 C1] 5
u132 [T1 R7 C2] 225 minutes/week
u133 [T1 R7 C3] 45 minutes/day
u134 [T1 R8 C1] 6
u135 [T1 R8 C2] 250 minutes/week
u136 [T1 R8 C3] 50 minutes/day
u137 [T1 R9 C1] 7
u138 [T1 R9 C2] 250 minutes/week
u139 [T1 R9 C3] 50 minutes/day
u140 [T1 R10 C1] 8
u141 [T1 R10 C2] 250 minutes/week
u142 [T1 R10 C3] 50 minutes/day
u143 [T1 R11 C1] HS (3 credits)
u144 [T1 R11 C2] 275 minutes/week
u145 [T1 R11 C3] 55 minutes/day
u146 The Arizona History and Social Science Standards have been designed so that these time assumptions provide adequate time for instruction and opportunities to learn the standards for each grade level. Depending on local factors, schools may allocate more or less time when determining curriculum programing within a specific context. These time recommendations do not explicitly address students who are far below or far above grade level. No set of grade specific standards can fully reflect the variety in abilities, needs, learning rates, and achievement levels of students in any given classroom. The Arizona History and Social Science Standards do not define intervention methods to support students who are far below or far above grade level or do not speak English as their first language.
=== page 10 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u149 Coding of the K-8 Standards Each K-8 standard is made up of three components. The grade level appears first, followed by the core discipline Big Idea, and finally a standard number. The standard number at the end of the code is designed for recording purposes and does not imply instructional sequence or importance. Examples and explanations of the coding of the standards are below. K.SP1.2 Explore how events of the past affect students’ lives and community
u150 (x=430) 6.E5.1 Describe the factors that influence trade between
u151 (x=107) Kindergarten
u152 (x=298) Standard Number 2
u153 countries and cultures.
u154 (x=167) K
u155 (x=195) .
u156 (x=213) SP1
u157 (x=277) .
u159 (x=451) Grade 6
u160 (x=619) Standard Number 1
u162 (x=523) .
u163 (x=546) E5
u164 (x=601) .
u166 (x=196) Standard addresses
u167 Disciplinary Skills and Processes
u168 Anchor Standard 1
u169 Standard addresses
u170 Economics
u171 Anchor Standard 5
=== page 11 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u174 Coding of the High School Social Studies Standards In Arizona, students are required to take three credits of high school social studies for graduation that are aligned to the state standards for social studies. The Arizona State Board of Education establishes the requirements for high school graduation. The minimum course of study and competency requirements are outlined in Arizona Administrative Code R7-2-302. The statewide minimum course of study requires students to take a minimum of three credits of social studies. The three credits in social studies must include one credit of American history, including Arizona history; one credit of world history/geography; one-half credit of American government, including Arizona government; and one-half credit of economics. LEAs are responsible for creating their courses using the high school standards. It is expected that by the time students graduate from high school, they will be taught all twenty-one Anchor Standards and the standards that fall under them. To support the creation of these courses, course consideration guides were created for each of the disciplinary areas. Each high school standard is made up of three components. The grade level appears first, followed by the core discipline Big Idea, and finally a standard number. The standard number at the end of the code is designed for recording purposes and does not imply instructional sequence or importance. An example and explanation of the coding of the standards is below. HS.SP4.2 Distinguish between long-term causes and triggering events in developing an argument.
u175 (x=80) High School
u176 (x=256) Standard Number 2
u177 HS.C2.6 Evaluate the contributions of individuals and groups, including Arizonans, who have played a role in promoting civic and democratic principles.
u178 (x=127) HS
u179 (x=167) .
u180 (x=188) SP4
u181 (x=243) .
u183 Standard addresses Disciplinary Skills and Processes
u184 Anchor Standard 4
=== page 12 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u187 KINDERGARTEN - CHILDREN AS CITIZENS
u188 Through an introduction to civics, geography, economics, and history, students will understand their roles and responsibilities as citizens within their own context. Students will also learn about their own culture and how it impacts understanding of oneself and others as well as be introduced to aspects of our National culture.
u189 ● Importance of rules and responsibilities ● Individual roles in a community ● Personal decision-making ● Familiarity with geographic models ● Culture in the home, school, and community ● American symbols, holidays, and traditions DISCIPLINARY SKILLS AND PROCESSES
u190 Chronological reasoning requires understanding processes of change and continuity over time, which means assessing similarities and differences between historical periods and between the past and present.
u191 ● K.SP1.1 Use a variety of words to reference time in the past, present, and future; identify the beginning, middle, and end of historical stories. ● K.SP1.2 Explore how events of the past affect students’ lives and community. ● K.SP1.3 With prompting and support, generate questions about individuals and groups from stories shared. Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to identify, compare, and evaluate multiple perspectives about a given event to draw conclusions since there are multiple points of view about events and issues.
u192 ● K.SP2.1 With prompting and support, compare diverse cultures using primary sources such as photographs, artifacts, and music and secondary sources
u193 such as fiction and non-fiction.
u194 Historians and Social Scientists gather, interpret, and use evidence to develop claims and answer historical, economic, geographical, and political questions and communicate their conclusions.
u195 ● K.SP3.1 With prompting and support, ask questions and construct responses to content studied. CIVICS
u196 Civic virtues and democratic principles are key components of the American political system.
u197 ● K.C1.1 Apply values of respect, responsibility, equality, and fairness within schools and communities. ● K.C1.2 Follow agreed upon rules for discussions when responding to others and making decisions as a group. ● K.C1.3 Compare one's own thoughts and opinions with those of others. Citizens have individual rights, roles, and responsibilities.
u198 ● K.C2.1 Describe roles and responsibilities of people in authority.
u199 • Such as school personnel, family members, and community members. ● K.C2.2 Explain how all people, not just official leaders, play important roles in our school and community.
=== page 13 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u202 Process, rules, and laws direct how individuals are governed and how society addresses problems.
u203 ● K.C4.1 Explain how people work together to identify and solve problems within the classroom and school. ● K.C4.2 Explain why rules are important within the classroom and school. ECONOMICS
u204 By applying economic reasoning, individuals seek to understand the decisions of people, groups, and societies.
u205 ● K.E2.1 Explain how needs, wants, and the availability of resources affect decision making. ● K.E2.2 Identify what one gains and gives up when they make choices. GEOGRAPHY
u206 The use of geographic representations and tools help individuals understand their world.
u207 ● K.G1.1 Use, explore, and construct maps, graphs and other geographical representations to support content focus.
u208 • Key concepts include but are not limited to graphing local weather and mapping the classroom. ● K.G1.2 Explore locations in stories shared. Human-environment interactions are essential aspects of human life in all societies.
u209 ● K.G2.1 Explain how water and weather impacts humans. HISTORY
u210 The development of civilizations, societies, culture, and innovation have influenced history and continue to impact the modern world.
u211 ● K.H1.1 Compare one’s own culture with the culture of others.
u212 • Key cultures include those in the classroom, community, and one of Arizona’s 22 Indian Nations. Cycles of conflict and cooperation have shaped relations among people, places, and environments.
u213 ● K.H2.1 Explain the benefits of cooperation and compromise as ways to solve problems. Patterns of social and political interactions have shaped people, places, and events throughout history and continue to shape the modern world.
u214 ● K.H4.1 Explain and explore origins of key American symbols, traditions and holidays.
u215 • Key American symbols include but are not limited to American flag, bald eagle, Statue of Liberty, and Mount Rushmore. • Key traditions include but are not limited to the Pledge of Allegiance and National Anthem. • Key holidays include but are not limited to Columbus Day, Thanksgiving, Presidents Day, Martin Luther King Jr. Day, Fourth of July, and Constitution Day. ● K.H4.2 Explore the stories of key historical figures through informational text and biographies.
=== page 14 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u218 FIRST GRADE – COMMUNITIES: LIVING AND WORKING TOGETHER
u219 Through the study of civics, geography, economics, and history, students will understand how a community functions and how each member contributes to the community for the common good. Students will study their local community and learn about characteristics that define urban, suburban, and rural communities. Democratic principles and participation in government are introduced. Community resources, environment, change over time, and cause/effect are examined.
u220 ● Understanding perspectives of others ● School and community functions of government ● Earning, spending, and saving money ● Using geographic models ● Effects of human movement ● Cooperation and compromise ● American symbols and traditions
u221 DISCIPLINARY SKILLS AND PROCESSES
u222 Chronological reasoning requires understanding processes of change and continuity over time, which means assessing similarities and differences between historical periods and between the past and present.
u223 ● 1.SP1.1 Place important life events in chronological order on a timeline. ● 1.SP1.2 Understand how events of the past affect students’ lives and communities. ● 1.SP1.3 Generate questions about individuals and groups who have shaped a significant historical change. Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to identify, compare, and evaluate multiple perspectives about a given event to draw conclusions about that event since there are multiple points of view about events and issues.
u224 ● 1.SP2.1 Compare diverse cultures using primary sources such as photographs, artifacts, and music and secondary sources such as fiction and non fiction. Historians and Social Scientists gather, interpret, and use evidence to develop claims and answer historical, economic, geographical, and political questions and communicate their conclusions.
u225 ● 1.SP3.1 Generate questions about issues in your community past and present. ● 1.SP3.2 With support identify evidence drawn from multiple sources to answer questions about issues in your community. ● 1.SP3.3 With support construct and communicate solutions to issues in your community. ● 1.SP3.4 Take group or individual action to help address community issues. ● 1.SP3.5 Ask and answer questions about explanations given.
u226 CIVICS
u227 Civic virtues and democratic principles are key components of the American political system.
u228 ● 1.C1.1 Apply values of respect, responsibility, equality, and fairness as a member of a community.
=== page 15 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u231 ● 1.C1.2 Follow agreed upon rules for discussions when responding to others and making decisions including consensus building procedures. ● 1.C1.3 Compare one's own thoughts and opinions with others’ perspectives. An understanding of civic and political institutions in society and the principles these institutions are intended to reflect including knowledge about law, politics, and government are essential to effective citizenship.
u232 ● 1.C3.1 Explain the importance of rules and laws in our community. • Key purposes include but are not limited to provide order, protect rights, provide benefits, assign responsibilities, and limit the power of people in authority ● 1.C3.2 Explain the role and function of local governments. • Key functions include but are not limited to make laws, carry out laws, enforce laws, manage conflicts, and protect the community • Key concepts include but are not limited to type of government and its leaders including the current Governor and President and Vice President of the United States ● 1.C3.3 Explain how community groups work to accomplish common tasks and fulfill responsibilities. • Such as voting, volunteering, community clean-up or recycling campaigns, and becoming informed on community issues ECONOMICS
u233 A financially literate individual understands how to manage income, spending, and investment.
u234 ● 1.E1.1 Identify different occupations and the skills and education needed for those jobs in our community. ● 1.E1.2 Describe reasons to save or spend money. By applying economic reasoning, individuals seek to understand the decisions of people, groups, and societies.
u235 ● 1.E2.1 Explain how needs, wants, and availability of resources affect decision making. ● 1.E2.2 Identify the benefits and costs of making various personal decisions. Individuals and institutions are interdependent within market systems.
u236 ● 1.E3.1 Describe the skills, knowledge, and sequence of events required to produce goods and services in our community. ● 1.E3.2 Explain how people in our community earn income. ● 1.E3.3 Explain how people can be producers and consumers in our community. GEOGRAPHY
u237 The use of geographic representations and tools helps individuals understand their world.
u238 ● 1.G1.1 Use, explore and construct maps, graphs and other geographical representations to support content focus. • Key concepts include but are not limited to physical features (rivers, lakes, mountains, landforms, desert) and human features (dams, cities, parks, hospitals, schools, railroad tracks, farms, factories, houses) ● 1.G1.2 Use a grid to locate places. Human-environment interactions are essential aspects of human life in all societies.
u239 ● 1.G2.1 Compare how human activities affect culture and the environment now and in the past. • Such as agriculture, industrialization, urbanization, and human migration
=== page 16 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u242 Examining human population and movement helps individuals understand past, present, and future conditions on Earth’s surface.
u243 ● 1.G3.1 Explain why and how people, goods, and ideas move from place to place. • Key concepts include but are not limited to transportation, immigration, education, technology, and natural resources ● 1.G3.2 Compare places past and present as it relates to content focus. HISTORY
u244 The development of civilizations, societies, cultures, and innovations have influenced history and continue to impact the modern world.
u245 ● 1.H1.1 Explain how ideas and innovation can contribute to a community by utilizing primary sources (artifacts, photographs, newspapers, speakers) and secondary sources (biographies, stories, articles). • Key examples include but are not limited to farming by irrigation, architecture, writing and inventions as they support content focus
u246 Cycles of conflict and cooperation have shaped relations among people, places, and environments.
u247 ● 1.H2.1 Explain the benefits of cooperation and compromise as ways to resolve conflict in communities past and present.
u248 Patterns of social and political interactions have shaped people, places, and events throughout history and continue to shape the modern world.
u249 ● 1.H4.1 Explain and explore origins of key American symbols, documents, landmarks, holidays, and leaders as well as their importance from the past to the present in our country. • Symbols include but are not limited to American flag, bald eagle, Statue of Liberty, White House, Washington Monument, Mount Rushmore, Liberty Bell, United States Capitol, and Arizona state symbols • Holidays include but are not limited to Columbus Day, Thanksgiving, Veterans Day, Memorial Day, Labor Day, Presidents Day, Martin Luther King Jr. Day, Independence Day, Constitution Day, and Arizona Statehood Day • Leaders include but are not limited to local and/or Tribal leaders, state leaders, and national leaders ● 1.H4.2 Draw upon fictional stories, biographies, and non-fiction/informational text to identify historical figures in your community, state, and nation and explain their significance in history and in the present day.
=== page 17 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u252 SECOND GRADE – THE WORLD AROUND ME
u253 Through the study of geography and economics, the students’ lenses expand to learn how their world is interconnected globally. Students will develop a spatial understanding of the world around them, so they can understand how other cultures and civilizations are interconnected and have influenced who we are as a community, state, and Nation. United States history, world history, and civics will also be taught in a comparative context. This storyline integrates well with the English Language Arts standards at this grade level since most districts have students read fables, folktales, and stories from the United States and around the world. The standards in second grade are skill-based and are designed to integrate the skills with the study of any region or civilization in the world since individual curriculum for ELA is varies throughout the state.
u254 ● Working together to solve problems ● Individual and leadership roles ● Earning, spending, and saving money in a global community ● Identifying regions using geographic models ● Influence of weather and climate ● Development and change of civilizations and cultures ● Societal institutions and their belief systems
u255 DISCIPLINARY SKILLS AND PROCESSES
u256 Chronological reasoning requires understanding processes of change and continuity over time, which means assessing similarities and differences between historical periods and between the past and present.
u257 ● 2.SP1.1 Create a chronological sequence of multiple events. ● 2.SP1.2 Understand how events of the past affect students’ lives and community. ● 2.SP1.3 Generate questions about individuals and groups who have shaped a significant historical change. Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to identify, compare, and evaluate multiple perspectives about a given event to draw conclusions about that event since there are multiple points of view about events and issues.
u258 ● 2.SP2.1 Compare diverse cultures from around the world using primary sources such as photographs, artifacts, and music and secondary sources such as fiction and non-fiction. ● 2.SP2.2 Compare perspectives of people in the past to those today through stories and biographies. Historians and Social Scientists gather, interpret, and use evidence to develop claims and answer historical, economic, geographical, and political questions and communicate their conclusions.
u259 ● 2.SP3.1 Identify facts and concepts associated with compelling and supporting questions. ● 2.SP3.2 Determine and use various kinds of sources to answer compelling and supporting questions. ● 2.SP3.3 Generate questions about a source as it relates to an event or development. ● 2.SP3.4 Gather relevant information from one or two sources. ● 2.SP3.5 Ask and answer questions about explanations and arguments. ● 2.SP3.6 Present a summary of an argument or explanation using print, oral, or digital technology.
=== page 18 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u262 Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to analyze relationships among causes and effects and to create and support arguments using relevant evidence.
u263 ● 2.SP4.1 Generate possible reasons for an event or development. ● 2.SP4.2 Select which reasons might be more likely than others to explain an event or development. CIVICS
u264 Citizens have individual rights, roles, and responsibilities.
u265 ● 2.C2.1 Describe roles and responsibilities of people in authority within our country and world. ● 2.C2.2 Explain how all people, not just official leaders, play important roles in the world. Process, rules, and laws direct how individuals are governed and how society addresses problems.
u266 ● 2.C4.1 Explain how people work together to identify and solve problems within our world. ● 2.C4.2 Explain how rules function in public settings. ECONOMICS
u267 A financially literate individual understands how to manage income, spending, and investment.
u268 ● 2.E1.1 Identify different occupations and skills needed in a global economy. ● 2.E1.2 Describe reasons to save or spend money.
u269 Individuals and institutions are interdependent within market systems.
u270 ● 2.E3.1 Identify and describe the goods and services that are produced around the world. ● 2.E3.2 Explain how people around the world earn income. ● 2.E3.3 Explain how people can be producers and consumers in a global economy.
u271 The domestic economy is shaped by interactions between government, institutions, and the private sector.
u272 ● 2.E4.1 Describe the public services that governments provide and how they meet the needs of individuals.
u273 The interconnected global economy impacts all individuals and groups in significant and varied ways.
u274 ● 2.E5.1 Illustrate how a country’s resources determine what is produced and traded. GEOGRAPHY
u275 The use of geographic representations and tools help individuals understand their world.
u276 ● 2.G1.1 Use and construct maps, graphs, and other geographic representations of familiar and unfamiliar places in the world; and locate physical and human features. • Key physical features include but are not limited to seven continents, oceans, lakes, rivers, mountain ranges, coasts, seas, and deserts • Key human features include but are not limited to equator, hemispheres, North and South Pole, cities, states, countries, regions, and landmarks ● 2.G1.2 Use maps, globes, and other simple geographic models to identify and explain cultural and environmental characteristics of places in the world based on stories shared.
=== page 19 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u279 Human-environment interactions are essential aspects of human life in all societies.
u280 ● 2.G2.1 Explain how weather, climate, and other environmental characteristics affect people’s lives in a place or region being studied. ● 2.G2.2 Describe how human activities affect the communities and the environment of places or regions. ● 2.G2.3 Describe the positive and negative effects of using natural resources. Examining human population and movement helps individuals understand past, present, and future conditions on Earth’s surface.
u281 ● 2.G3.1 Explain why and how people, goods, and ideas move from place to place. • Key concepts include but are not limited to transportation, trade, immigration, migration, and communication Global interconnections and spatial patterns are a necessary part of geographic reasoning.
u282 ● 2.G4.1 Identify different physical and cultural regions in the world.
u283 HISTORY
u284 The development of civilizations, societies, cultures, and innovations have influenced history and continue to impact the modern world.
u285 ● 2.H1.1 Explain how individuals can make contributions to a civilization and/or culture in place or region studied. ● 2.H1.2 Using primary and secondary sources, compare civilizations and/or cultures around the world and how they have changed over time in a place or region studied. ● 2.H1.3 Examine developments from the civilization and/or culture in place or region studied. Economic, political, and religious ideas and institutions have influenced history and continue to shape the modern world.
u286 ● 2.H3.1 Generate questions about the institutions and belief systems of different societies. • Key concepts include but are not limited to religion, governments, economic systems, and education
=== page 20 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u289 THIRD GRADE - ARIZONA STUDIES
u290 prehistoric to present-day Arizona Students will study Arizona within an integrated approach considering the following factors:
u291 ● The contributions of various cultural and ethnic groups including the 22 Indian Nations that reside in Arizona. ● Economic, political, and geographic elements ● Structure of the state and local governments ● Roles and responsibilities as citizens of Arizona ● Examination of primary and secondary sources including written and oral histories, images, current events, and artifacts ● Disciplinary skills and processes including change and continuity over time, multiple perspectives, using and understanding sources, and cause and effect There are many topics to pursue in 3rd grade. LEAs should identify topical emphases to allow for depth of study needed to effectively engage student/learners in the inquiry process. DISCIPLINARY SKILLS AND PROCESSES
u292 Chronological reasoning requires understanding processes of change and continuity over time, which means assessing similarities and differences between historical periods and between the past and present.
u293 ● 3.SP1.1 Create and use a chronological sequence of related events to compare developments that happened at the same time. ● 3.SP1.2 Compare life in specific historical time periods to life today. ● 3.SP1.3 Generate questions about individuals and groups who have impacted history. Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to identify, compare, and evaluate multiple perspectives about a given event to draw conclusions a given event since there are multiple points of view about events and issues.
u294 ● 3.SP2.1 Explain why individuals and groups have different points of view on the same event. Historians and Social Scientists gather, interpret, and use evidence to develop claims and answer historical, economic, geographical, and political questions and communicate their conclusions.
u295 ● 3.SP3.1 Develop questions about Arizona history, geography, government, and economics. ● 3.SP3.2 Distinguish between primary and secondary sources. ● 3.SP3.3 Identify and use evidence that draws information from multiple sources to answer compelling questions about Arizona. ● 3.SP3.4 Compare information provided by various sources about Arizona. ● 3.SP3.5 Generate questions about multiple historical sources. ● 3.SP3.6 Construct arguments and explanations using reasoning, examples, and details from sources. ● 3.SP3.7 Present summaries of arguments and explanations using print, oral , and digital technologies.
=== page 21 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u298 Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to analyze relationships among causes and effects and to create and support arguments using relevant evidence.
u299 ● 3.SP4.1 Explain probable causes and effects of events. ● 3.SP4.2 Summarize the central claim in a secondary source. CIVICS
u300 Civic virtues and democratic principles are key components of the American political system.
u301 ● 3.C1.1 Describe civic virtues and democratic principles within a variety of government structures, societies, and/or communities within Arizona. • Key concepts include but are not limited to respecting the rights of others, helping to promote the common good, and participating in government ● 3.C1.2 Use listening, consensus-building, and voting procedures to decide on and act in their classrooms. An understanding of civic and political institutions in society and the principles these institutions are intended to reflect including knowledge about law, politics, and government are essential to effective citizenship.
u302 ● 3.C3.1 Describe the origins, functions, and structure of the Arizona Constitution, local governments, and tribal governments • Key concepts for state government include but are not limited to distinguishing the difference between national and state governments, describing the major responsibilities of each branch, describing the important services state governments provide, describing how state government officials are chosen and who those current officials are, explaining how people can participate in their state governments, explaining why it is important that people participate in their state government, and understanding how state government services are paid for • Key concepts for local governments include but are not limited to distinguishing between state and local governments, knowing services local governments provide such as public safety, public transportation, education, recreation, explain how local government services are provided and paid for, describing how local government officials are chosen and who they are, explaining how people can participate in their local government, and explaining why it is important to participate in their local government • Key concepts for Tribal governments include but are not limited to distinguishing between national, state, local, and tribal governments. understanding the services provided by tribal governments, their organization, and how leaders are chosen • 3.C3.2 Describe ways in which people benefit from and are challenged by working together, including through families, school, workplaces, voluntary organizations, and government.
u303 ECONOMICS
u304 A financially literate individual understands how to manage income, spending, and investment.
u305 ● 3.E1.1 Describe and discuss industries and occupations that have shaped Arizona. • Key concepts include but are not limited to the 5 C’s (copper, cattle, cotton, citrus, climate), ranching, mining, farming, and tourism ● 3.E1.2 Identify various forms of earning income in the state of Arizona. ● 3.E1.3 Identify positive and negative incentives that influence financial decisions people make to save and spend money.
u306 By applying economic reasoning, individuals seek to understand the decisions of people, groups, and societies.
u307 ● 3.E2.1 Explain how availability of resources affects decision making in Arizona with respect to water and other natural resources.
=== page 22 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u310 ● 3.E2.2 Describe how Arizona is connected to other states, Mexico, and other nations by movement of people, goods, and ideas. GEOGRAPHY
u311 The use of geographic representations and tools helps individuals understand their world.
u312 ● 3.G1.1 Use and construct maps and graphs to represent changes in Arizona over time. • Key concepts include but are not limited to locating physical features including the Grand Canyon, Mogollon Rim, Colorado River, Salt River, Gila River • Key concepts include but are not limited to locating human features including major cities, counties, Hoover Dam, Roosevelt Dam, and state capital • Key concepts include but are not limited to distinct physical and cultural characteristics of Arizona including landforms, the 5C’s, climate zones, elevations, plants, animals, Arizona’s 22 Indian Nations, diverse ethnic, racial, and religious cultures
u313 Human-environment interactions are essential aspects of human life in all societies.
u314 ● 3.G2.1 Explain how people modify and adapt to the Arizona environment. • Key concepts include but are not limited to modification and adaptation of the environment by Paleo-Indians, Prehistoric-Indians, explorers, settlers, farmers, immigrants, migrants, and the 22 Arizona Indian Nations, and the use of Arizona’s natural resources
u315 Examining human population and movement helps individuals understand past, present, and future conditions on Earth’s surface.
u316 ● 3.G3.1 Describe the movement of people in and out of Arizona over time. • Key concepts include but are not limited to factors contributing to settlement, economic development, growth of major cities, major economic activities, and land use patterns Global interconnections and spatial patterns are a necessary part of geographical reasoning.
u317 3.G4.1 Describe how Arizona has changed over time. • Key concepts include but are not limited to Paleo-Indians, explorers, settlers, farmers, immigrants, migrants, the 22 Arizona Indian Nations, plants, land use, and animals
u318 HISTORY
u319 The development of civilizations, societies, cultures, and innovations have influenced history and continue to impact the modern world.
u320 ● 3.H1.1 Utilize a variety of sources to construct a historical narrative exploring Arizona’s cultures, civilizations, and innovations. • Key concepts include but are not limited to impact of prehistoric peoples, Native Americans, Latinx, African Americans, Asian Americans, and newcomers from the United States and world on art, language, architecture, mining, agriculture, and innovations • Key concepts include but are not limited to explorers, settlers, trappers, missionaries, and colonizers • Key events include but are not limited to statehood • Influential individuals and groups in the history and development of Arizona Cycles of conflict and cooperation have shaped relations among people, places, and environments.
=== page 23 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u323 ● 3.H2.1 Use primary and secondary sources to generate questions about the causes and effects of conflicts and resolutions throughout Arizona’s history. • Key concepts include but are not limited to conflicts over exploration, colonization, settlement, industrialism, and the 22 Arizona Indian Nations ● 3.H2.2 Examine how individuals and groups have worked together throughout Arizona’s history.
u324 Economic, political, and religious ideas and institutions have influenced history and continue to shape the modern world.
u325 ● 3.H3.1 Evaluate how individual rights, freedoms, and responsibilities can vary based on community, state, and nation. • Key concepts such as but not limited to, women’s rights, segregation, Native American rights and citizenship, internment and POW (prisoners of war) camps, migrants and farmworkers ● 3.H3.2 Use primary and secondary sources to analyze the changes that have taken place in Arizona which could include the use of current events.
=== page 24 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u328 FOURTH GRADE - REGIONS AND CULTURES OF THE AMERICAS
u329 Pre-contact Americas to European settlements (up to 1763) Students will study the Americas (North, Central, and South America along with the Caribbean Islands) using an integrated approach considering the following factors:
u330 ● Theories about the first peopling of the Americas ● The development of Mesoamerican and South American civilizations including the Olmec, Inca, Maya, and Aztec ● American Indian life in the Americas prior to European exploration including the peoples in the Southwest, Pacific Northwest, nomadic nations of the Great Plains, and the woodland peoples east of the Mississippi River (Eastern Woodland) ● The causes and consequences of European exploration and colonization ● The environmental, political, and cultural consequences of the interactions among European, African, and American Indian peoples in the late 15th through 17th centuries ● Regional settlement patterns, significant developments, and life in the Southern, Middle, and New England colonies ● Roles and responsibilities as members of a society ● The contributions of various cultural and ethnic groups to the development of the Americas ● Examination of primary and secondary sources including written and oral histories, images, and artifacts • Inclusion of historical fiction and picture books in addition to informational text. ● Disciplinary skills and processes including change and continuity over time, multiple perspectives, using and understanding sources, and cause and effect There are many topics to pursue in 4th grade. LEAs should identify topical emphases to allow for depth of study needed to effectively engage student/learners in the inquiry process. DISCIPLINARY SKILLS AND PROCESSES
u331 Chronological reasoning requires understanding processes of change and continuity over time, which means assessing similarities and differences between historical periods and between the past and present.
u332 ● 4.SP1.1 Create and use a chronological sequence of related events to compare developments that happened at the same time. ● 4.SP1.2 Compare life in specific historical time periods to life today. ● 4.SP1.3 Generate questions about individuals and groups who have shaped significant historical events. • Key individuals may include but are not limited to explorers, leaders (Mesoamerican, American Indian, and political), settlers, women, landowners, organizations, colonists, missionaries, and enslaved and free Africans
u333 Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to identify, compare, and evaluate multiple perspectives about a given event to draw conclusions about that event since there are multiple points of view about events and issues.
u334 ● 4.SP2.1 Explain why individuals and groups during the same historical period differed in their perspectives on issues and events. • Key issues may include but are not limited to slavery, exploration, property rights, and colonization ● 4.SP2.2 Explain connections among historical contexts and people’s perspectives at the time.
=== page 25 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u337 Historians and Social Scientists gather, interpret, and use evidence to develop claims and answer historical, economic, geographical, and political questions and communicate their conclusions.
u338 • 4.SP3.1 Develop questions about events and developments in the Americas. • 4.SP3.2 Compare information provided by different sources about events and developments in the Americas. • 4.SP3.3 Generate questions about multiple sources and their relationships to events and developments in the Americas. • 4.SP3.4 Use information about a source including the author, date, place of origin, intended audience, and purpose to evaluate the extent to which the source is useful for studying a topic. • 4.SP3.5 Construct and present arguments and explanations using reasoning, examples, and details with relevant information and data from multiple sources. • 4.SP3.6 Present summaries of arguments and explanations using print, oral, and digital technologies.
u339 Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to analyze relationships among causes and effects and to create and support arguments using relevant evidence.
u340 ● 4.SP4.1 Explain probable causes and effects of events and developments. ● 4.SP4.2 Summarize the central claim in a secondary work of history. ● 4.SP4.3 Use evidence from multiple sources to develop and communicate claims about the causes and effects of events. CIVICS
u341 Civic virtues and democratic principles are key components of the American political system.
u342 ● 4.C1.1 Analyze civic virtues and democratic principles or lack thereof within a variety of government structures, societies, and/or communities within the Americas. • Key concepts include but are not limited to governmental structures, views on property ownership and land use, representative assemblies, town meetings, colonial legislatures, and royal governments throughout the Americas in the time period being studied
u343 Citizens have individual rights, roles, and responsibilities.
u344 ● 4.C2.1 Use primary and secondary sources to generate questions about the concepts and ideas such as liberty, justice, equality, and individual rights. • Key concepts include but are not limited to oppression, slavery and the slave trade, indentured servitude, The Mayflower Compact, religious freedom, and European treatment of native cultures in the Americas ECONOMICS
u345 By applying economic reasoning, individuals seek to understand the decisions of people, groups, and societies.
u346 ● 4.E2.1 Examine concepts of scarcity, choice, opportunity cost, and risk. • Key concepts include but are not limited to nomadic and sedentary societies, reasons for European exploration, triangular trade, Jamestown settlement, and the establishment of colonies
u347 Individuals and institutions are interdependent within market systems.
u348 ● 4.E3.1 Compare different industries, occupations, and resources as well as different forms of income earned or received that have shaped the Americas.
=== page 26 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u351 • Key concepts include but are not limited to societal roles of the individual in Mesoamerican civilizations, the emerging labor force in the colonies (cash crop farming, slavery, indentured servitude), resources and industries of the Southern, Middle, and New England Colonies, economic way of life in western Africa before the 16th century, and views on property ownership and land use between European settlers and American Indians
u352 GEOGRAPHY
u353 The use of geographic representations and tools help individuals understand their world.
u354 ● 4.G1.1 Use and construct maps and graphs to represent changes in the Americas over time. • Key concepts include but are not limited to human and physical features of the Americas, trade and exploration routes, the location of civilizations and societies in the Americas including indigenous peoples, and settlement patterns including the development of the Southern, Middle, and New England Colonies
u355 Human-environment interactions are essential aspects of human life in all societies.
u356 ● 4.G2.1 Compare the diverse ways people or groups of people have impacted, modified, or adapted to the environment of the Americas. • Key concepts include but are not limited to disease, farming, family structure, housing, cultural assimilation, cultural amalgamation, climate, transportation, domestication of animals, clothing, recreation, and utilization of renewable and non-renewable natural resources
u357 Examining human population and movement helps individuals understand past, present, and future conditions on Earth’s surface.
u358 ● 4.G3.1 Explain how the location and use of resources affects human settlement and movement. • Key concepts include but are not limited to theories about the peopling of the Americas, the Columbian Exchange, treatment of indigenous people, triangular trade, searches for trade routes to Asia that led to exploration and settlement of the Americas Global interconnections and spatial patterns are a necessary part of geographic reasoning.
u359 ● 4.G4.1 Explain the positive and negative effects of increasing economic interdependence on distinct groups, countries, and new settlements. • Key concepts include but are not limited to trade, mercantilism, the development of new technologies, and the use of natural resources
u360 HISTORY
u361 The development of civilizations, societies, cultures, and innovations have influenced history and continue to impact the modern world.
u362 ● 4.H1.1 Utilizing a variety of multi-genre primary and secondary sources, construct historical narratives about cultures, civilizations, and innovations in the Americas. • Key concepts include but are not limited to Olmec, Maya, Inca, Aztec, American Indians living in the Americas before and after European exploration, enslaved and free Africans living in the colonies, British, French, Dutch, Spanish explorers and settlers, and the thirteen colonies Cycles of conflict and cooperation have shaped relations among people, places, and environments.
u363 ● 4.H2.1 Describe the cycles of conflict and compromise that occurred in the Americas during the convergence of Europeans, American Indians, and Africans in the Americas before and after European exploration ● 4H2.2 Analyze the different approaches used by the Spanish, Portuguese, British, and the French in their interactions with American Indians.
=== page 27 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u366 Economic, political, and religious ideas and institutions have influenced history and continue to shape the modern world.
u367 ● 4.H3.1 Examine how economic, political, and religious ideas and institutions have influenced the development of individual rights, freedoms, and responsibilities in the Americas. • Key concepts include but are not limited to Olmec, Maya, Inca, Aztec, American Indians living in the Americas before European exploration • Key concepts include but are not limited to the influence of colonial governments on constitutional government (fundamental rights, rule of law, representative government, voting rights, separation of powers), how enslaved Africans drew upon their African past along with elements of new cultures to develop a distinct African-American culture, how religious tensions in the New England Colonies established colonies founded on religious tolerance, ways in which society expresses itself (art, music, dance, crafts, and writings), and how religious beliefs of groups like the Quakers and Spanish missionaries led to questions about the morality of slavery and ideas of equality
=== page 28 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u370 FIFTH GRADE-UNITED STATES STUDIES
u371 American Revolution to Industrialism (1763 to 1900s)
u372 Students understand the history of the United States within an integrated approach considering the following factors:
u373 ● Historic and economic events from American Revolution to Industrialism including but not limited to the American Revolution, constitutional convention, westward expansion, Civil War and Reconstruction, and growth of industrial and urban America looking at origins, founders, and key political, economic, and social figures ● Economic, political, and geographic elements as they relate to the events outlined above such as technological developments, urbanization, territorial expansion, industrialization, political parties, and universal suffrage ● Creation of the Constitution and the principles within the document including historical and philosophical influences, influence of state constitutions, Articles of Confederation, compromises and ratification debates at the Constitutional Convention, Bill of Rights, limited government, popular sovereignty, federalism, rule of law, checks and balances, and separation of powers ● Development and structure of the national government including the Preamble, the three branches, examples of powers granted to each branch, powers granted to the states and individuals, the Bill of Rights, and current issues regarding federalism and rights ● Influence of immigration including push/pull factors, industrialization, urbanization, diversification of the population, and debates over immigration ● Contributions of various cultural and ethnic groups to the changing social and political structure of the United States ● Roles and responsibilities as citizens of the United States including participation in the political system ● Examination of primary and secondary sources including written and oral histories, images, and artifacts with special attention being given to founding documents including the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, Bill of Rights and all subsequent amendments, and landmark Supreme Court cases ● Inclusion of historical fiction and picture books in addition to informational text ● Disciplinary skills and processes including change and continuity over time, multiple perspectives, using and understanding sources, and cause and effect There are many topics to pursue in 5th grade. LEAs should identify topical emphases to allow for depth of study needed to effectively engage student/learners in the inquiry process. DISCIPLINARY SKILLS AND PROCESSES
u374 Chronological reasoning requires understanding processes of change and continuity over time, which means assessing similarities and differences between historical periods and between the past and present.
u375 ● 5.SP1.1 Create and use a chronological sequence of related events to compare developments that happened at the same time. ● 5.SP1.2 Explain how events of the past affect students’ lives and society. ● 5.SP1.3 Generate questions about individuals and groups who have shaped significant historical changes and continuities. • Key individuals or groups should represent the time- period being studied and be inclusive of the diversity represented in the history of the United States
=== page 29 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u378 Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to identify, compare, and evaluate multiple perspectives about a given event to draw conclusions since there are multiple points of view about events and issues.
u379 ● 5.SP2.1 Explain why individuals and groups during the same historical period differed in their perspectives • Key individuals and groups can include but are not limited to a loyalist and patriots, federalist and anti-federalist, Hamilton and Jefferson, abolitionists and slave owners, Abraham Lincoln and John C. Calhoun, southerners and northerners, labor and business, nativists and immigrants, and American Indians and settlers • Key issues and events can include but are not limited to federalism, constitutional interpretation, individual liberties, slavery, Jim Crow Laws and segregation, secession, westward expansion, Indian boarding schools, immigration, Manifest Destiny, worker’s rights, and women’s rights
u380 Historians and Social Scientists gather, interpret, and use evidence to develop claims and answer historical, economic, geographical, and political questions and communicate their conclusions.
u381 • 5.SP3.1 Develop compelling and supporting questions about the United States that are open to different interpretations. • 5.SP3.2 Use distinctions among fact and opinion to determine the credibility of multiple sources. • 5.SP3.3 Compare information provided by multiple sources about events and developments in the United States. • 5.SP3.4 Infer the intended audience and purpose of a source from information within the source itself. • 5.SP3.5 Use information about a historical source including the author, date, place of origin, intended audience, and purpose to judge the extent to which the source is useful for studying a topic and evaluate the credibility of the source. • 5.SP3.6 Construct and present arguments using claims and evidence from multiple sources. • 5.SP3.7 Construct and present explanations using reasoning, correct sequence, examples and details with relevant information and data.
u382 Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to analyze relationships among causes and effects and to create and support arguments using relevant evidence.
u383 ● 5.SP4.1 Explain probable causes and effects of events and developments in United States history from the revolutionary period to the rise of industry and urbanization. • Events include but are not limited to the American Revolution, Constitutional Convention, Civil War, Reconstruction, westward expansion, industrialism, and urbanization ● 5.SP4.2 Use evidence to develop a claim about the past. ● 5.SP4.3 Summarize the central claim in a secondary source. CIVICS
u384 Citizens have individual rights, roles, and responsibilities.
u385 ● 5.C2.1 Explain how a republic relies on people’s responsible participation within the context of key historical events pre-American Revolution to Industrialization. • Key concepts include but are not limited to volunteerism, joining associations and groups, joining political parties, using the First Amendment (free speech, religion, press, assembly, petition), censorship, voting in elections, running for office, working on campaigns, bringing cases to court, civil disobedience, protest movements, and serving in the military
u386 An understanding of civic and political institutions in society and the principles these institutions are intended to reflect including knowledge about law, politics, and government are essential to effective citizenship.
u387 ● 5.C3.1 Describe the origins, functions, and structure of the United States Constitution and the three branches of government.
=== page 30 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u390 • Key origins include historical and philosophical influences like the government structures of Ancient Greece and Rome, Enlightenment thinkers like John Locke, British documents like the Magna Carta, colonial governments, the Articles of Confederation, and the compromises and ratification debates of the Constitutional Convention Key functions of the United States government as outlined in the Preamble • Key structures include distributing, sharing, and limiting powers of the national government through separation of powers, checks and balances, and federalism • Key organization of the Constitution include the Preamble, seven Articles, and Amendments (including the Bill of Rights)
u391 Process, rules, and laws direct how individuals are governed and how society addresses problems.
u392 ● 5.C4.1 Using primary and secondary sources to examine historical and contemporary means of a changing society through laws and policies in order to address public problems. • Key concepts can include but are not limited to the purpose of the Declaration of Independence, the creation of the Constitution, the formation and development of social and reform movements, and responses to industrialism and poverty at the turn of the century ● 5.C4.2 Use a range of deliberative and democratic procedures to make decisions about and act on issues and civic problems in their classrooms and schools. ECONOMICS
u393 A financially literate individual understands how to manage income, spending, and investment.
u394 ● 5.E1.1 Give examples of financial risks that individuals and households face within the context of the time period studied. By applying economic reasoning, individuals seek to understand the decisions of people, groups, and societies.
u395 ● 5.E2.1 Compare the benefits and costs of individual choices within the context of key historical events. • Key concepts can include but are not limited to smuggling during the American Revolution, separating from England, economic powers outlined in the Constitution, slavery, secession, territorial expansion, and unregulated industry
u396 Individuals and institutions are interdependent within market systems.
u397 ● 5.E3.1 Develop an understanding of the characteristics of entrepreneurship within a market economy and apply these characteristics to individuals during the time-period studied. • Characteristics include but are not limited to risk taking, innovation, and problem solving The domestic economy is shaped by interactions between government, institutions, and the private sector.
u398 ● 5.E4.1 Describe how government decisions on taxation, spending, protections, and regulation affected the national economy during the time-period being studied ● 5.E4.2 Analyze how agriculture, new industries, innovative technologies, changes in transportation, and labor impacted the national economy including productivity, supply and demand, and price during the time-period being studied. The interconnected global economy impacts all individuals and groups in significant and varied ways.
u399 ● 5.E5.1 Generate questions to explain how trade leads to increasing economic interdependence on different nations. • Key concepts include but are not limited to products that are imported into markets within the United States and products that are exported to other markets in the world
=== page 31 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u402 GEOGRAPHY
u403 The use of geographic representations and tools help individuals understand their world.
u404 ● 5.G1.1 Use and construct maps and graphs to represent changes in the United States. • Key concepts include but are not limited to physical and human features of the United States, the regions of the United States and their characteristics, geographic location of major events, the growth of the United States through territorial expansion, demographic changes, and the states and their capitals Human-environment interactions are essential aspects of human life in all societies.
u405 ● 5.G2.1 Describe how natural and human-caused changes to habitats or climate can impact our world. Examining human population and movement helps individuals understand past, present, and future conditions on Earth’s surface.
u406 ● 5.G3.1 Use key historical events with geographic tools to analyze the causes and effects of environmental and technological events on human settlements and migration. • Key concepts include but are not limited to consequences of territorial expansion on American Indians, the institution of slavery, the positive and negative impact of new technologies on the environment and the growth of cities, and the impact of transportation and infrastructure on settlement and migration
u407 Global interconnections and spatial patterns are a necessary part of geographic reasoning.
u408 ● 5G4.1 Describe how economic activities, natural phenomena, and human-made events in one place or region are impacted by interactions with nearby and distant places or regions. HISTORY
u409 Cycles of conflict and cooperation have shaped relations among people, places, and environments.
u410 ● 5.H2.1 Use primary and secondary sources to summarize the causes and effects of conflicts, resolutions, and social movements throughout the historical timeframe. • Key conflicts can include but are not limited to cultural conflicts, political conflicts, economic conflicts, military conflicts, and conflicts related to resource use and availability
u411 Patterns of social and political interactions have shaped people, places, and events throughout history and continue to shape the modern world.
u412 ● 5.H4.1 Use primary and secondary sources to describe how diverse groups (racial, ethnic, class, gender, regional, immigrant/migrant) shaped the United States’ multicultural society within the historical timeframe.
=== page 32 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u415 SIXTH GRADE – GLOBAL STUDIES: WORLD REGIONS AND CULTURES OF THE EASTERN
u416 HEMISPHERE
u417 early civilizations - Renaissance & Reformation
u418 The content focus will be viewed through geographic and historical lenses. Sixth grade students will understand the cultural, religious, economic, and political systems of selected societies in the Eastern Hemisphere. Regions in the Eastern Hemisphere include the Middle East and North Africa, sub-Saharan Africa, Europe, Asia (east, south, and southeast), and Oceania. A course on world regions and cultures can be approached from many angles and perspectives. There are many topics to pursue in 6th grade. LEAs should identify topical emphases to allow for depth of study needed to effectively engage student/learners in the inquiry process. Educators may choose to take a regional approach, a thematic approach, or a historical approach to the content.
u419 • Beginnings of human society such as early hominid development, peopling of the earth, and the Neolithic revolution • Early river civilizations such as Mesopotamia, the Nile River Valley, the Indus River Valley, and the Yellow River Valley • World religions including, but not limited to Buddhism, Christianity, Confucianism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Shintoism, Sikhism, and Taoism, (origins, founders, major tenets, practices, and sacred writings) • Classical civilizations such as Greek, Roman, Persian, and Chinese (political, social, religious, and economic systems) • Rise and fall of empires and the impacts to the region • Growth of trade networks across the Eastern Hemisphere and impacts such as cultural exchange and diffusion, inventions, ideas, diseases, and language • Development of feudal systems in medieval Europe and Japan • Different civilizations in the Eastern Hemisphere during the Middle Ages with regards to political, social, religious, and economic systems • Origins, accomplishments, and geographic diffusion of the Renaissance and the Reformation • Ancient and modern geography of the Eastern Hemisphere • Examination of primary and secondary sources including written and oral histories, images, and artifacts • Disciplinary skills and processes including change and continuity over time, multiple perspectives, using and understanding sources, and cause and effect DISCIPLINARY SKILLS AND PROCESSES
u420 Chronological reasoning requires understanding processes of change and continuity over time, which means assessing similarities and differences between historical periods and between the past and present.
u421 • 6.SP1.1 Examine ways that historians and social scientists know about the past. • 6.SP1.2 Analyze connections among events and developments in various geographic and cultural contexts. • 6.SP1.3 Classify a series of historical events and developments as examples of change and/or continuity. • 6.SP1.4 Evaluate the significance of past events and their effect on students’ lives and society.
u422 Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to identify, compare, and evaluate multiple perspectives about a given event to draw conclusions about that event since there are multiple points of view about events and issues.
u423 ● 6.SP2.1 Explain how and why perspectives of people have changed throughout different historical eras.
=== page 33 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u426 ● 6.SP2.2 Analyze how people’s perspective influenced what information is available in the historical sources they created.
u427 Historians and Social Scientists gather, interpret, and use evidence to develop claims and answer historical, economic, geographical, and political questions and communicate their conclusions.
u428 • 6.SP3.1 Define and frame compelling and supporting questions about issues and events in the time-period and region studied. • 6.SP3.2 Use evidence to develop claims and counterclaims in response to compelling questions in the time period and region studied. • 6.SP3.3 Classify the kinds of historical sources used in secondary interpretations. • 6.SP3.4 Use information about a historical source including the author, date, place of origin, intended audience, and purpose to judge the extent to which the source is useful for studying a topic and evaluate the credibility of the source. • 6.SP3.5 Use questions generated about multiple sources to identify further areas of inquiry and additional sources. • 6.SP3.6 Construct and present arguments using claims and evidence from multiple sources. • 6.SP3.7 Construct and present explanations using reasoning, correct sequence, examples and details with relevant information and data.
u429 Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to analyze relationships among causes and effects and to create and support arguments using relevant evidence.
u430 ● 6.SP4.1 Explain the multiple causes and effects of events and developments in the past. ● 6.SP4.2 Organize applicable evidence into a coherent argument about the past. CIVICS
u431 Citizens have individual rights, roles, and responsibilities
u432 ● 6.C2.1 Analyze the beliefs, experiences, perspectives, and values that underlie points of view regarding civic issues in the time period and regions studied. Process, rules, and laws direct how individuals are governed and how society addresses problems.
u433 ● 6.C4.1 Explain challenges and opportunities people and groups face when solving local, regional, and/or global problems. ● 6.C4.2 Describe and apply civic virtues including deliberative processes that contribute to the common good and democratic principles in school, community, and government. • Key concepts include but are not limited to civility, respect for the rights of others, individual responsibility, respect for law, open mindedness, critical examination of issues, negotiation and compromise, civic mindedness, compassion, patriotism, conciliation, and consensus building ECONOMICS
u434 A financially literate individual understands how to manage income, spending, and investment.
u435 ● 6.E1.1 Analyze the relationship between education, income, and job opportunities within the context of the time period and region studied. ● 6.E1.2 Give examples of financial risks that individuals and households face within the context of the time period and region studied. Individuals and institutions are interdependent within market systems.
u436 ● 6.E3.1 Describe the relationship between various costs and benefits of economic production.
=== page 34 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u439 ● 6.E3.2 Explain the influence the factors of production have on the manufacture of goods and services within different cultures, regions, and communities. • Key concepts include traditional economic systems, manorialism, guilds, taxation systems, and coerced labor ● 6.E3.3 Analyze the influence of specialization and trade within diverse cultures and communities in regions studied. The interconnected global economy impacts all individuals and groups in significant and varied ways.
u440 ● 6.E5.1 Describe the factors that influence trade between countries or cultures. ● 6.E5.2 Explain the effects of increasing economic interdependence within distinct groups. GEOGRAPHY
u441 The use of geographic representations and tools helps individuals understand their world.
u442 ● 6.G1.1 Use and construct maps, graphs, and other representations to explain relationships between locations of places and regions. • Key concepts include major landforms and water bodies, countries, cities, ecosystems, climate, languages, religion, economic systems, governmental systems, population patterns, disease, trade routes, and settlement patterns
u443 Human-environment interactions are essential aspects of human life in all societies.
u444 ● 6.G2.1 Compare diverse ways people or groups of people have impacted, modified, or adapted to the environment of the Eastern Hemisphere. • Key concepts include but are not limited to hunter-gatherer communities, human settlement, Neolithic Revolution, irrigation and farming, domestication of animals, and influence of climate and seasons
u445 Examining human population and movement helps individuals understand past, present, and future conditions on Earth’s surface.
u446 ● 6.G3.1 Analyze how cultural and environmental characteristics affect the distribution and movement of people, goods, and ideas. • Key concepts include but are not limited to language, land and sea transportation and trade routes ● 6.G3.2 Analyze the influence of location, use of natural resources, catastrophic environmental events, and technological developments on human settlement and migration. • Key concepts include but are not limited to development of early river civilization, pastoral societies, rise of cities, innovations in transportation, and collapse of empires
u447 Global interconnections and spatial patterns are a necessary part of geographic reasoning.
u448 ● 6.G4.1 Explain why environmental characteristics vary among different world regions. • Key concepts include but are not limited to latitude, elevation, landforms, location, and human factors ● 6.G4.2 Describe how natural and human-made catastrophic events and economic activities in one place affect people living in nearby and distant places. • Key concepts include but are not limited to disease, war, items exchanged, ideas spread along trade routes, and natural disasters HISTORY
u449 The development of civilizations, societies, cultures, and innovations have influenced history and continue to impact the modern world.
u450 ● 6.H1.1 Compare the development and characteristics of historical cultures and civilizations from different global regions within designated time periods.
=== page 35 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u453 ● 6.H1.2 Explain the causes and effects of interactions between cultures and civilizations. • Key concepts include but are not limited to trade, competition, warfare, slavery, serfdom, innovations, and contributions. Cycles of conflict and cooperation have shaped relations among people, places, and environments.
u454 ● 6.H2.1 Evaluate the causes and effects of conflict and resolution among different societies and cultures. • Key factors such as control and use of natural resources, political power, religious rivalry, acquisition of wealth, cultural diversity, and economic rivalry Economic, political, and religious ideas and institutions have influenced history and continue to shape the modern world.
u455 ● 6.H3.1 Analyze the impact of religious, government, and civic groups over time. ● 6.H3.2 Generate questions to examine the similarities and differences between major world religions and the role of religion in the formation of regions and their cultural, political, economic, and social identity. • Key world religions such as Buddhism, Christianity, Confucianism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Shintoism, Sikhism, and Taoism ● 6.H3.3 Explain why communities, states, and nations have different motivations for their choices including individual rights, freedoms, and responsibilities.
u456 Patterns of social and political interactions have shaped people, places, and events throughout history and continue to shape the modern world.
u457 ● 6.H4.1 Describe how different group identities such as racial, ethnic, class, gender, regional, and immigrant/migration status emerged and contributed to societal and regional development, characteristics, and interactions over time.
=== page 36 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u460 SEVENTH GRADE - INTEGRATED GLOBAL STUDIES Scientific Revolution & Enlightenment -present
u461 The content focus will be viewed through historical and geographic lenses. Seventh grade students will understand the relationships and interactions between societies and cultures in both the Eastern and Western Hemispheres. United States history will be taught as it intersects with global issues. There are many topics to pursue in 7th grade. LEAs should identify topical emphases to allow for depth of study needed to effectively engage student/learners in the inquiry process.
u462 ● Influence of the Scientific Revolution on innovation and the Enlightenment on the concept of rights ● Revolutions around the world such as the American Revolution, French Revolution, Russian Revolution, the Cultural Revolution (Mao Zedong), and Latin American revolutions ● Global imperialism and its lasting consequences on regional conflict, stability, indigenous peoples, and human movement, including slavery and involuntary migrations ● Impact of industrialization and the rise of organized labor ● Global depressions ● World War I and World War II including the time period between the wars with the rise of fascism ● Cold War including origins, nuclear deterrence, and outcome ● Global conflicts and their consequences such as the Korean War, Vietnam War, Arab-Israeli Conflict, and Gulf War ● Government and economic systems such as monarchy, dictatorship, theocracy, oligarchy, aristocracy, democracy, constitutional republic, anarchy, and capitalism, socialism, and communism including founders, major tenets, practices, and writings ● Examination of primary and secondary sources including written and oral histories, images, and artifacts ● Disciplinary skills and processes including change and continuity over time, multiple perspectives, using and understanding sources, and cause and effect DISCIPLINARY SKILLS AND PROCESSES
u463 Chronological reasoning requires understanding processes of change and continuity over time, which means assessing similarities and differences between historical periods and between the past and present.
u464 ● 7.SP1.1 Analyze connections among events and developments in broader historical contexts. ● 7.SP1.2 Classify a series of historical events and developments as examples of change and/or continuity. ● 7.SP1.3 Evaluate the significance of past events and their effect on students’ lives and global society. ● 7.SP1.4 Use questions generated about individuals and groups to analyze why they, and the developments they shaped, are historically significant.
u465 Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to identify, compare, and evaluate multiple perspectives about a given event to draw conclusions about that event since there are multiple points of view about events and issues.
u466 ● 7.SP2.1 Analyze multiple factors that influence the perspectives of people during different historical eras. ● 7.SP2.2 Explain how and why perspectives of people have changed over time. ● 7.SP2.3 Analyze how people’s perspectives influenced what information is available in the historical sources they created.
=== page 37 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u469 Historians and Social Scientists gather, interpret, and use evidence to develop claims and answer historical, economic, geographical, and political questions and communicate their conclusions.
u470 ● 7.SP3.1 Create compelling questions and supporting questions that reflect enduring issues about the world, past and present. ● 7.SP3.2 Use evidence drawn from multiple sources to develop and support claims and counterclaims in response to compelling questions. ● 7.SP3.3 Detect possible limitations in the historical record based on evidence collected from various kinds of historical sources. ● 7.SP3.4 Use questions generated about multiple sources, including international sources, to identify further areas of inquiry and additional sources. ● 7.SP3.5 Evaluate the relevance and utility of sources based on information such as author, date, origin, intended audience, and purpose. ● 7.SP3.6 Construct and present arguments based on claims and counterclaims while pointing out the strengths and limitations of those arguments. ● 7.SP3.7 Construct and present explanations using reasoning, correct sequence, examples and details, while acknowledging the strengths and weaknesses of the explanations. Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to analyze relationships among causes and effects and to create and support arguments using relevant evidence.
u471 ● 7.SP4.1 Explain the multiple causes and effects of events and developments in the past and present. ● 7.SP4.2 Evaluate the influence of various causes of events and developments in the past and present. ● 7.SP4.3 Organize applicable evidence into a coherent argument. ● 7.SP4.4 Compare the central arguments in multiple secondary sources on a related topic using multiple types of sources. CIVICS
u472 Citizens have individual rights, roles, and responsibilities.
u473 ● 7.C2.1 Explain how revolutions and other changes in government impact citizens’ rights. Process, rules, and laws direct how individuals are governed and how society addresses problems.
u474 ● 7.C4.1 Compare historical and contemporary means of changing societies to promote the common good. ● 7.C4.2 Assess specific rules and laws (both actual and proposed) as a means of addressing public problems. ● 7.C4.3 Analyze the purpose, process, implementation, and consequences of decision making and public policies in multiple settings. ● 7.C4.4 Explain challenges people face and opportunities they create in addressing local, regional, and global problems at various times and places. Apply a range of deliberative and democratic procedures to make decisions and act in local, regional, and global communities. ECONOMICS
u475 By applying economic reasoning, individuals seek to understand the decisions of people, groups, and societies.
u476 ● 7.E2.1 Explain how economic decisions affect the well-being of individuals, businesses, and society. ● 7.E2.2 Evaluate current economic issues in terms of benefits and costs for distinct groups in society.
u477 Individuals and institutions are interdependent within market systems.
u478 ● 7.E3.1 Explain the roles of buyers, sellers, and profits in product, labor, and financial markets. ● 7.E3.2 Analyze the relationship between supply, demand, and competition with emphasis on how they influence prices, wages, and production. ● 7.E3.3 Analyze the influence of institutions such as corporations, non-profits, and labor unions on the economy in a market system. ● 7.E3.4 Explain ways in which money facilitates exchange.
=== page 38 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u481 The interconnected global economy impacts all individuals and groups in significant and varied ways.
u482 ● 7.E5.1 Explain the interdependence of trade and how trade barriers influence trade among nations. ● 7.E5.2 Compare the various economic systems. ● 7.E5.3 Explain the benefits and the costs of trade policies to individuals, businesses, and society. GEOGRAPHY
u483 The use of geographic representations and tools helps individuals understand their world.
u484 ● 7.G1.1 Use and construct maps and other geographic representations to explain the spatial patterns of cultural and environmental characteristics. • Key tools and representations such as maps, globes, aerial and other photos, remotely sensed images, tables, graphs, and geospatial technology ● 7.G1.2 Analyze various geographic representations and use geographic tools to explain relationships between the location of places and their environments.
u485 Human-environment interactions are essential aspects of human life in all societies.
u486 ● 7.G2.1 Explain how cultural demographic patterns, economic decisions, and human adaptations shape the identity of nearby and distant places. ● 7.G2.2 Analyze cultural and environmental characteristics that make places both similar and different.
u487 Examining human population and movement helps individuals understand past, present, and future conditions on Earth’s surface.
u488 ● 7.G3.1 Explain how changes in transportation, communication, and technology influence the spatial connections among human settlements and affect the diffusion of ideas and cultural practices. ● 7.G3.2 Analyze how relationships between humans and environments extend or contract patterns of settlement and movement. ● 7.G3.3 Evaluate the influences of long-term, human-induced environmental change on spatial patterns and how it may cause conflict and promote cooperation. • 7.G3.4 Evaluate human population and movement may cause conflict or promote cooperation.
u489 Global interconnections and spatial patterns are a necessary part of geographic reasoning.
u490 ● 7.G4.1 Analyze cultural and environmental characteristics among various places and regions of the world. ● 7.G4.2 Explain how the relationship between the human and physical characteristics of places and production of goods influences patterns of world trade. ● 7.G4.3 Analyze how changes in population distribution patterns affect changes in land use in places and regions ● 7.G4.4 Explain an issue in terms of its scale (local, regional, state, national, or global) HISTORY
u491 The development of civilizations, societies, cultures, and innovations have influenced history and continue to impact the modern world.
u492 ● 7.H1.1 Analyze the rise and decline, interactions between, and blending of cultures and societies. ● 7.H1.2 Trace the development and impact of scientific, technological, and educational innovations within historical time periods.
u493 Cycles of conflict and cooperation have shaped relations among people, places, and environments.
=== page 39 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u496 ● 7.H2.1 Investigate how conflict can be both unifying and divisive throughout communities, societies, nations, and the world. ● 7.H2.2 Compare the multiple causes and effects of conflict and approaches to peacemaking.
u497 Economic, political, and religious ideas and institutions have influenced history and continue to shape the modern world.
u498 ● 7.H3.1 Compare the origins and spread of influential ideologies and both religious and non-religious worldviews. ● 7.H3.2 Analyze how economic and political motivations impact people and events. ● 7.H3.3 Trace how individual rights, freedoms, and responsibilities have evolved over time. ● 7.H3.4 Explain the influence of individuals, groups, and institutions on people and events in historical and contemporary settings. ● 7.H3.5 Investigate a significant historical topic from global history that has significance to an issue or topic today.
u499 Patterns of social and political interactions have shaped people, places, and events throughout history and continue to shape the modern world.
u500 ● 7.H4.1 Evaluate how the diversity of a society impacts its social and political norms. ● 7.H4.2 Evaluate the changing patterns of class, ethnic, racial, and gender structures and relations; consider immigration, migration, and social mobility.
=== page 40 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u503 EIGHTH GRADE - CITIZENSHIP AND CIVIC ENGAGEMENT IN TODAY’S SOCIETY
u504 The content focus will be viewed through civic and economic lenses. Citizenship and civic engagement will be taught through inquiry. Eighth grade students will make connections between historical and current/contemporary issues as a base for implementing change in society. Students will recognize and practice their roles and responsibilities as both American and global citizens. United States History will focus on the major events that have their roots in the Constitution, Bill of Rights, and subsequent amendments. There are many topics to pursue in 8th grade. LEAs should identify topical emphases to allow for depth of study needed to effectively engage student/learners in the inquiry process.
u505 ● Foundations of the United States government stemming from historical events such as the American Revolution and Civil War ● Constitution including structure, function, and principles ● Formal institutions such as Congress, the courts, the presidency, and linkage institutions such as media, elections, interest groups, polling, and political parties ● Historical and current legislation and landmark Supreme Court cases ● Civil rights movements throughout American history ● Immigration ● Amendments to the Constitution that have expanded the right to vote and equal protection under the law ● Social movements and issues both historical and current including the constitutional principles and structures (amendments, courts, Congress, and executive orders) that spur, promote, and protect these movements ● Human rights and genocides including treaties and organizations that promote human rights and a study of the nations and leaders that abuse human rights and/or support genocide (In addition to the study of the Holocaust, other genocides should be studied) ● Environmental issues ● Information and media age including digital citizenship and media literacy ● Terrorism both domestic and international and how it influences citizens’ safety and rights ● Examination of primary and secondary sources including written and oral histories, images, and artifacts ● Disciplinary skills and processes including change and continuity over time, multiple perspectives, using and understanding sources, and cause and effect DISCIPLINARY SKILLS AND PROCESSES
u506 Chronological reasoning requires understanding processes of change and continuity over time, which means assessing similarities and differences between historical periods and between the past and present.
u507 ● 8.SP1.1 Analyze connections among events and developments in broader historical contexts. ● 8.SP1.2 Classify a series of historical events and developments as examples of change and/or continuity. ● 8.SP1.3 Evaluate the significance of past events and their effect on students’ lives and society. ● 8.SP1.4 Use questions generated about individuals and groups to analyze why they, and the developments they shaped, are historically significant.
u508 Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to identify, compare, and evaluate multiple perspectives about a given event to draw conclusions about that event since there are multiple points of view about events and issues.
u509 ● 8.SP2.1 Analyze multiple factors that influence the perspectives of people during different historical eras.
=== page 41 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u512 ● 8.SP2.2 Explain how and why perspectives of people have changed over time. ● 8.SP2.3 Analyze how people’s perspectives influenced what information is available in the historical sources they created.
u513 Historians and Social Scientists gather, interpret, and use evidence to develop claims and answer historical, economic, geographical, and political questions and communicate their conclusions.
u514 • 8.SP3.1 Create and answer compelling and supporting questions that reflect enduring issues in the field of history and social science. • 8.SP3.2 Detect possible limitations in the historical record based on evidence collected from various kinds of historical sources. • 8.SP3.3 Use questions generated about multiple historical sources to identify further areas of inquiry and additional sources. • 8.SP3.4 Evaluate the relevance and utility of historical sources based on information such as author, date, origin, intended audience, and purpose. • 8.SP3.5 Gather relevant information from multiple sources while using the origin, authority, structure, context, and corroborative value of the source to guide the selection to support claims and counterclaims. • 8.SP3.6 Construct and present arguments based on claims and counterclaims while pointing out the strengths and limitations of the arguments. • 8.SP3.7 Construct and present explanations using reasoning, correct sequence, examples, details with relevant information and data, while acknowledging the strengths and weaknesses of the explanations. • 8.SP3.8 Present arguments and explanations on topics of interest to others to reach multiple audiences in and outside of the classroom print, oral, and digital technologies.
u515 Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to analyze relationships among causes and effects and to create and support arguments using relevant evidence.
u516 ● 8.SP4.1 Explain the multiple causes and effects of events and developments in the past. ● 8.SP4.2 Evaluate the influence of various causes of events and developments in the past. ● 8.SP4.3 Organize applicable evidence into a coherent argument about the multiple causes and effects of events and issues. ● 8.SP4.4 Compare the credibility, and authenticity of central arguments in secondary works of history on related topics in multiple media. CIVICS
u517 Civic virtues and democratic principles are key components of the American political system
u518 ● 8.C1.1 Analyze ideas and principles contained in the founding documents of the United States, including the Declaration of Independence and Constitution, and explain how they influence society and political systems. • Ideas and principles contained in founding documents include but are not limited to popular sovereignty, consent of the governed, the social contract, limited government, rule of law, separation of powers, checks and balances, federalism, and individual rights ● 8.C1.2 Demonstrate civic virtues that contribute to the common good and democratic principles within a variety of deliberative processes and settings. ● 8.C1.3 Analyze the influence of personal interests and perspectives when people address issues and problems in government and civil society. ● 8.C1.4 Engage in projects to help or inform others such as community service and service-learning projects.
u519 Citizens have individual rights, roles, and responsibilities
u520 ● 8.C2.1 Analyze the powers of citizens in a variety of governmental and non-governmental contexts. ● 8.C2.2 Explain specific roles, rights and responsibilities of people in a society. ● 8.C2.3 Analyze concepts and ideals such as majority and minority rights, civil dissent, and the rule of law. ● 8.C2.4 Explain how immigrants become naturalized citizens.
=== page 42 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u523 An understanding of civic and political institutions in society and the principles these institutions are intended to reflect including knowledge about law, politics, and government is essential to effective citizenship.
u524 ● 8.C3.1 Describe the impact of political and civic institutions such as political parties, interest groups, elections, and the media in shaping policy. • Key concepts include but are not limited to political party platforms, structure of parties on a national, state, and local level including precincts, primary and general elections, presidential nominating system including conventions, congressional elections including congressional districts, gerrymandering, and census, electoral college including how electors are chosen in Arizona, types of interest groups, and role of the media ● 8.C3.2 Examine the origins and purpose of constitutions, laws, treaties, and international agreements. ● 8.C3.3 Compare the structures, powers, and limits of government at distinct levels in the United States.
u525 Process, rules, and laws direct how individuals are governed and how society addresses problems
u526 ● 8.C4.1 Compare historical and contemporary means of changing societies to promote the common good. ● 8.C4.2 Assess specific rules and laws (both actual and proposed) as means of addressing public problems. ● 8.C4.3 Analyze the purpose, process, implementation, and consequences of decision making and public policies in multiple settings and at different levels including the national, state, local (county, city, school board), and tribal. ● 8.C4.4 Identify, research, analyze, discuss, and defend a position on a national, state, or local public policy issue including an action plan to address or inform others about the issue. ● 8.C4.5 Analyze how a specific problem can manifest itself at the local, regional, and global levels, identifying its characteristics and causes, and the challenges and opportunities faced by those trying to address the problem. Apply a range of deliberative and democratic procedures to take action and solve the problem. ECONOMICS
u527 A financially literate individual understands how to manage income, spending, and investment.
u528 • 8.E1.1 Analyze the relationship between education, income, and job opportunities. • 8.E1.2 Analyze the relationship between interest rates, saving, and use of credit. • 8.E1.3 Analyze the relationship between investment and return. • 8.E1.4 Examine the factors that influence spending decisions. • 8.E1.5 Create a budget and examine the benefits of budgeting • 8.E1.6 Analyze the impact of debt on individuals. • 8.E1.7 Understand several types of financial investments and calculate rates of return. • 8.E1.8 Identify ways insurance may minimize personal financial risk.
u529 By applying economic reasoning, individuals seek to understand the decisions of people, groups, and societies.
u530 ● 8.E2.1 Explain how economic decisions affect the well-being of individuals, businesses, and society. ● 8.E2.2 Evaluate current economic issues in terms of benefits and costs for distinct groups.
u531 Individuals and institutions are interdependent within market systems.
u532 ● 8.E3.1 Explain the roles of buyers, sellers, and profits in product, labor, and financial markets. ● 8.E3.2 Analyze the relationship between supply, demand, and competition and their influence on prices, wages, and production. ● 8.E3.3 Analyze the influence of institutions such as corporations, non-profits, and labor unions in a market economy.
=== page 43 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u535 The domestic economy is shaped by interactions between government, institutions, and the private sector.
u536 ● 8.E4.1 Explain how inflation, deflation, and unemployment affect distinct groups. ● 8.E4.2 Explain the influence of changes in interest rates on borrowing and investing. ● 8.E4.3 Explain the effect of productivity on standard of living.
u537 The interconnected global economy impacts all individuals and groups in significant and varied ways.
u538 ● 8.E5.1 Explain the interdependence of trade and how trade barriers influence trade among nations. ● 8.E5.2 Compare various economic systems such as command, mixed, and free market. ● 8.E5.3 Explain the benefits and the costs of trade policies to individuals, businesses, and society. GEOGRAPHY
u539 The use of geographic representations and tools helps individuals understand their world.
u540 ● 8.G1.1 Use geographic tools and representations to analyze historical and modern political and economic issues and events. • Key tools and representations such as maps, globes, aerial and other photos, remotely sensed images, tables, graphs, and geospatial technology Human-environment interactions are essential aspects of human life in all societies.
u541 ● 8.G2.1 Examine impact of and responses to environmental issues such as air, water, and land pollution, deforestation, urban sprawl, and changes to climate. ● 8.G2.2 Evaluate how political, social, and economic decisions throughout time have influenced cultural and environmental characteristics of various places and regions.
u542 Examining human population and movement helps individuals understand past, present, and future conditions on Earth’s surface.
u543 ● 8.G3.1 Evaluate the impact of economic, political, and social decisions that have caused conflict or promoted cooperation throughout time.
u544 Global interconnections and spatial patterns are a necessary part of geographic reasoning.
u545 ● 8.G4.1 Take an active stance on a geographic issue reflecting its scale (local, regional, state, national, or global).
u546 HISTORY
u547 Cycles of conflict and cooperation have shaped relations among people, places, and environments.
u548 ● 8.H2.1 Explain how different beliefs about the government’s role in social and economic life have affected political debates and policies in the United States. ● 8.H2.2 Investigate how conflict can be both unifying and divisive both domestically and internationally. ● 8.H2.3 Explain how geographic and environmental factors shaped communities and how competition over resources have affected government policies.
u549 Economic, political, and religious ideas and institutions have influenced history and continue to shape the modern world.
u550 ● 8.H3.1 Explain how and why prevailing civil, social, religious, and political movements changed the United States during the 20th and 21st centuries. ● 8.H3.2 Explain how popular movements, reform efforts, and activist groups have sought to change American society and institutions.
=== page 44 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u553 ● 8.H3.3 Compare how individual rights, freedoms, and responsibilities have evolved over time around the world. ● 8.H3.4 Investigate a significant historical topic from United States History that has significance to an issue or topic today.
=== page 45 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u556 HIGH SCHOOL STANDARDS
u557 The Arizona History and Social Science Standards are articulated by grade level for kindergarten through eighth grade. Each of those grade levels also has a content theme and focus for the year. This is not the case for the high school standards. The Arizona State Board of Education establishes the requirements for high school graduation. The minimum course of study and competency requirements are outlined in Arizona Administrative Code R7-2-302. The statewide minimum course of study requires students to take a minimum of three credits of social studies. The three credits in social studies must include one credit of American history, including Arizona history; one credit of world history/geography; one-half credit of American government, including Arizona government; and one-half credit of economics. Local Education Agencies (LEAs) are responsible for creating their courses using the high school standards. It is expected that by the time students graduate from high school, they will be taught all twenty-one Anchor Standards and the standards that fall under them. The core discipline standards are not meant to be stand-alone courses. LEAs will use a variety of standards from the core disciplines to create courses. All courses will include the Disciplinary Skills and Processes standards. To support the creation of these courses, course consideration guides were created for each of the disciplinary areas. COURSE CONSIDERATIONS FOR HIGH SCHOOL CIVICS/GOVERNMENT
u558 Using inquiry in civics, high school students explore how to become active citizens. To become engaged citizens requires a knowledge of the history, principles, and foundations of our republic. A comprehensive study of civics can be approached from many angles and perspectives with a focus on inquiry. A civics course can be organized in a variety of ways including thematic, chronological, or chrono-thematic. The course should include content from the following topics:
u559 • Foundations of government including but not limited to the historical foundations and philosophical foundations of the American political system, the purpose and role of government, and where government gets its authority • Structures and function of tribal, local, Arizona and other states, national, and international governments including but not limited to constitutional vs. non-constitutional governments, and how governments are organized, limits and powers of the legislative, judicial, and executive branch, and comparative governments • Institutions of the national government including but not limited to Congress, the President and the bureaucracy, federal courts; and institutions of the state government including the legislature, governor and the bureaucracy, and the state courts • Law-making process including the role of deliberation and compromise • Media, interest groups, and political parties including but not limited to the how these linkage institutions connect the people to government and shape political and social interests, the role of the free press in the American political system, the origin and role of political parties, the two-party system, the role of third parties in American politics, and the social, political, and economic positions of American political parties in history and the present day • Media Literacy including but not limited to roles of media, types of media, and media and consumer biases • Elections, voting, and voting behavior including but not limited to political socialization, creation of legislative and congressional districts, opportunities for participation, campaigns, types of elections including primary process and general election process (local, state, and federal), laws governing elections, voter turnout, and barriers to voting • Citizenship including rights, roles, and responsibilities of a citizen and the process for naturalization • Civil Liberties and Civil Rights • American political culture, values, and principles that are basic to American constitutional democracy and the republic such as individual rights, popular sovereignty, common good, patriotism, rule of law, freedom of conscience and expressions, privacy and civil society, justice, representative government, checks and balances, freedom of religion, civilian control of the military, and equality • Public policy including researching current issues or policies at the local, state, or federal level • Foreign Policy including but not limited to formation and implementation There are many topics to pursue in in a Civics/Government course. LEAs should identify topical emphases to allow for depth of study needed to effectively engage student/learners in the inquiry process and to educate students about the roles and responsibilities of citizenship.
=== page 46 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u562 COURSE CONSIDERATIONS FOR HIGH SCHOOL ECONOMICS
u563 Using inquiry in economics, high school students explore the economic reasoning process to make informed decisions in a wide variety of contexts. Economics is grounded in knowledge about how people, institutions, and societies choose to use resources to meet their wants and needs. The study of economics can be approached from many angles and perspectives with a focus on inquiry. A comprehensive economics course should include content from the following topics:
u564 • Financial Literacy/ Personal Finance including but not limited to budgeting, saving, spending, investment, credit, banking, and insurance • Economic Reasoning including but not limited to the concepts of scarcity, factors of production, opportunity costs, and cost-benefit analysis • Economic systems including but not limited to command, mixed, and free market, and economic philosophers and theories, including but not limited to Adam Smith, Karl Marx, and John Maynard Keynes • Exchange and Markets including but not limited to supply and demand, private property rights, competition, incentives, entrepreneurship, prices, the invisible hand, competition and institutions in the private and public sector • The National Economy including but not limited to fiscal and monetary policy, GDP, unemployment, inflation, economic growth, and distribution of wealth • The Global Economy including but not limited to trade, tariffs, and exchange rates There are many topics to pursue in an Economics course. LEAs should identify topical emphases to allow for depth of study needed to effectively engage student/learners in the inquiry process and to educate students about economic decision making.
u565 COURSE CONSIDERATIONS FOR HIGH SCHOOL GEOGRAPHY
u566 The geography standards can be taught as either a stand-alone course or incorporated in to civics, economics, or history courses. Geography enhances the study of civics, economics, and history. Using inquiry in geography will help students understand and appreciate their own place in the world and fosters curiosity about global diversity of environments and cultures. Thinking geographically requires knowing that the world is a set of complex ecosystems interacting at multiple scales to structure the spatial patterns and processes that influence our daily lives. Geographic reasoning would include the following topics:
u567 • Maps, imagery, and geospatial technologies • Charts, graphs, and tables • Human interaction with the environment • Population, movement, and migration • Land use • Industrialization and agriculture • Political development • Culture
=== page 47 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u570 COURSE CONSIDERATIONS FOR HIGH SCHOOL UNITED STATES/ARIZONA HISTORY
u571 Using inquiry in history, high school students explore a variety of peoples, events, and movements in United States history with a focus on inquiry into the evolution of American democratic principles, changes in society, economic and geographical development, and the emergence of the United States as a global power. A United States history course can be organized in a variety of ways including thematic, chronological, regional, or through case studies. Special attention should be paid to how Arizona and its diverse cultures and individuals contribute to United States history. It is expected that students in elementary and middle school will have analyzed events, documents, movements, and people in Arizona and United States history from the colonial period through the Cold War. It is recommended that this course maximize time in a manner to allow for depth of content and connection to current issues and events. The course should include but is not limited to content from the following historical eras:
u572 • Revolution and a New Nation including but not limited to causes of the American Revolution, reasons for American victory, impact of the Revolution on politics, economy, and society, and the creation of the American political system looking at origins, and key political and social figures • Nation Building and Sectionalism including but not limited to territorial expansion and its impacts on external powers and Native Americans, regional tensions due to industrialism, immigration, and the expansion of slavery, changes in the political democracy after 1800, and cultural, religious, and reform movements in the Antebellum period • Civil War and Reconstruction including but not limited to causes, course, and impact of the Civil War on various groups in the United States, the impacts of different reconstruction plans, and the emergence of Jim Crow and segregation • Emergence of Modern America including but not limited to industrialization, immigration and migration, progressivism, Federal Indian Policy, suffrage movements, racial, religious and class conflict, the growth of the United States as a global power and World War I and its aftermath • Great Depression and World War II including but not limited to social, political, and economic changes during the 1920’s, the role of government, impact of the depression on diverse groups of Americans, the New Deal, and the cause and course of World War II, the character of the war at home, and the impacts of the war on the United States • Postwar United States including the economic boom and social transformation of the United States, the Cold War, the impact of conflicts in Korea and Vietnam, domestic and international policies, and the struggle for civil rights and equality • Contemporary United States including but not limited to domestic politics and policies, economic, social and cultural developments, growing international conflict and tension, 9-11 and responses to terrorism, environmental issues, poverty, globalization, nuclear proliferation, and human rights There are many topics to pursue in an United States/Arizona History course. LEAs should identify topical emphases to allow for depth of study needed to effectively engage student/learners in the inquiry process.
=== page 48 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u575 COURSE CONSIDERATIONS FOR HIGH SCHOOL WORLD HISTORY
u576 Using inquiry in history high school students explore a variety of peoples, events, and movements in world history with a focus on inquiry into the impact of social, geographic, political, and economic influences on historical events. A world history course should include the study of the peoples of Africa, the Americas, Asia, and Europe. A balanced approach to the Eastern and Western Hemispheres is needed for a comprehensive study of world history topics. It is recommended that the course begin with the 15th century to allow for depth of content and connection to current issues and events. A world history course can be organized in a variety of ways including thematic, chronological, regional, or through case studies. The course should include but is not limited to the following topics of study:
u577 • World Belief Systems including but not limited to Buddhism, Christianity, Confucianism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Shintoism, Sikhism, Taoism, and as well as non-religious worldviews and ideologies (origins, founders, major tenets, practices, and sacred writings). Topics may include but are not limited to beliefs about the origins of the universe, political correctness, humanism, secularism, monotheism, polytheism, agnosticism and atheism • Interregional interactions including but not limited to European exploration, the trans-African and trans-Atlantic slave systems, and land and oceanic trade systems • Revolutions in thought • Industrial Revolution including impact on both industrialized and non-industrialized nations and the origins of modern economic systems such as capitalism, communism and socialism including influential figures • Political Revolutions such as French Revolution, Russian Revolution, Latin American Revolutions, and the Chinese Cultural Revolution. • Global rise of Nation-States including both western and non-western states • World War I, inter-war period, and World War II including causes, characteristics, and consequences; such as the world-wide depression, rise of fascism, totalitarianism, the spread of communism, and nationalism in China, Turkey, and India • Holocaust and other genocides • The Cold War including origins, the emergence of the Soviet Union and communist China, conflicts such as the Korean War, space race, arms race, and its impact on third world countries, and the collapse of the Soviet Union and its impact on the international community • Global imperialism, decolonization, democratization, and its legacy Asia, Africa, and Latin America • Contemporary global issues including but not limited to global terrorism, globalization, human rights, regional conflicts, population, environmental issues, technology and information age There are many topics to pursue in a World History course. LEAs should identify topical emphases to allow for depth of study needed to effectively engage student/learners in the inquiry process.
=== page 49 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u580 DISCIPLINARY SKILLS AND PROCESSES
u581 Chronological reasoning requires understanding processes of change and continuity over time, which means assessing similarities and differences between historical periods and between the past and present.
u582 (x=108) • HS.SP1.1
u583 (x=180) Evaluate how events and developments were shaped by unique circumstances of time and place as well as broader contexts.
u584 (x=108) • HS.SP1.2
u585 (x=180) Analyze change and continuity in historical eras.
u586 (x=108) • HS.SP1.3
u587 (x=180) Evaluate the significance of past events as they relate to their own lives and the world.
u588 (x=108) • HS.SP1.4
u589 (x=180) Use compelling questions generated about individuals and groups to assess how the significance of their actions changes over time and is shaped by the historical context.
u590 Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to identify, compare, and evaluate multiple perspectives about a given event to draw conclusions since there are multiple points of view about events and issues.
u591 (x=108) • HS.SP2.1
u592 (x=180) Analyze how contexts shaped and continue to shape people’s perspectives.
u593 (x=108) • HS.SP2.2
u594 (x=180) Analyze the ways in which perspective shapes recorded history.
u595 (x=108) • HS.SP2.3
u596 (x=180) Demonstrate historical empathy when examining individuals or groups in the past whose perspectives might be very different from those held today.
u597 Historians and Social Scientists gather, interpret, and use evidence to develop claims and answer historical, economic, geographical, and political questions and communicate their conclusions.
u598 (x=108) • HS.SP3.1
u599 (x=180) Develop and frame questions about issues and events in the discipline and determine the types of sources that will be helpful in answering these questions.
u600 (x=108) • HS.SP3.2
u601 (x=180) Gather relevant information from multiple sources representing a wide range of views while using origin, authority, structure, context, and corroborative value of the source to guide the selection.
u602 (x=108) • HS.SP3.3
u603 (x=180) Analyze the relationship between primary sources and the secondary interpretations made from them including possible limitations in various kinds of evidence and differing secondary interpretations.
u604 (x=108) • HS.SP3.4
u605 (x=180) Evaluate the credibility of a source by examining how experts value the source.
u606 (x=108) • HS.SP3.5
u607 (x=180) Use questions generated about multiple historical sources to pursue further inquiry and investigate additional sources.
u608 (x=108) • HS.SP3.6
u609 (x=180) Construct and present arguments using precise and knowledgeable claims, with evidence from multiple sources, while acknowledging counterclaims and evidentiary weaknesses.
u610 (x=108) • HS.SP3.7
u611 (x=180) Construct and present explanations using sound reasoning, correct sequence (linear and non-linear) examples, and details with significant and pertinent information and data, while acknowledging the strengths and weaknesses of the explanation.
u612 (x=108) • HS.SP3.8
u613 (x=180) Present arguments and explanations that feature ideas and perspectives on issues and topics to reach a range of audiences and venues using print, oral, and digital technologies.
u614 Thinking within the discipline involves the ability to analyze relationships among causes and effects and to create and support arguments using relevant evidence.
u615 (x=108) • HS.SP4.1
u616 (x=180) Analyze multiple and complex causes and effects of events in the past and present.
u617 (x=108) • HS.SP4.2
u618 (x=180) Distinguish between long-term causes and triggering events in developing an argument.
u619 (x=108) • HS.SP4.3
u620 (x=180) Integrate evidence from multiple relevant sources and interpretations into a reasoned argument.
=== page 50 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u623 (x=108) • HS.SP4.4
u624 (x=180) Compare the central arguments in secondary works on related topics in multiple media. Critique the central arguments in secondary works on related topics in multiple media in terms of their accuracy and relevance.
u625 CIVICS
u626 Civic virtues and democratic principles are key components of the American political system.
u627 (x=108) • HS.C1.1
u628 (x=180) Explain the significance of civic virtues to a well-functioning constitutional republic.
u629 (x=108) • HS.C1.2
u630 (x=180) Evaluate how society and political systems in different contexts promote civic virtue and democratic principles established by the founding documents.
u631 (x=108) • HS.C1.3
u632 (x=180) Explain and use deliberative processes implemented in various civic and political institutions.
u633 (x=108) • HS.C1.4
u634 (x=180) Analyze the evolution of civic virtues, democratic principles, constitutional rights, and human rights.
u635 Citizens have individual rights, roles, and responsibilities.
u636 (x=108) • HS.C2.1
u637 (x=180) Explain the importance of individual participation in civic and political institutions.
u638 (x=108) • HS.C2.2
u639 (x=180) Analyze the role of citizens in the United States political system over time and compare this to the role of citizens in other political systems.
u640 (x=108) • HS.C2.3
u641 (x=180) Evaluate the evolution of ideals and rights established in historical documents, legislation, executive actions, and court cases.
u642 (x=108) • HS.C2.4
u643 (x=180) Analyze the responsibilities of citizens.
u644 (x=108) • HS.C2.5
u645 (x=180) Compare the rights guaranteed in Arizona Constitution to those in the United States Constitution.
u646 (x=108) • HS.C2.6
u647 (x=180) Evaluate the contributions of individuals and groups, including Arizonans, who have played a role in promoting civic and democratic principles.
u648 An understanding of civic and political institutions in society and the principles these institutions are intended to reflect including knowledge about law, politics, and government are essential to effective citizenship.
u649 (x=108) • HS.C3.1
u650 (x=180) Examine how the United States Constitution established a system of government that has powers, responsibilities, and limits and analyze how those powers, responsibilities, and limits have changed over time.
u651 (x=108) • HS.C3.2
u652 (x=180) Analyze the origins, functions, and structures of government at the national, state, local, and tribal levels and compare with other systems of government.
u653 (x=108) • HS.C3.3
u654 (x=180) Analyze the impact of political parties, interest groups, elections, and the media on political institutions.
u655 (x=108) • HS.C3.4
u656 (x=180) Analyze the impact of constitutions, laws, treaties, charters, and agreements on the maintenance of international order.
u657 Process, rules, and laws direct how individuals are governed and how society addresses problems.
u658 (x=108) • HS.C4.1
u659 (x=180) Evaluate multiple procedures for making governmental decisions in all three branches and at the local, state, tribal, national, and international levels in terms of the civic purpose achieved.
u660 (x=108) • HS.C4.2
u661 (x=180) Evaluate local, state, national, and international policies in terms of intended and unintended outcomes and related consequences.
u662 (x=108) • HS.C4.3
u663 (x=180) Explain the procedures for elections at the local, state, tribal, and national levels.
u664 (x=108) • HS.C4.4
u665 (x=180) Analyze the purpose, process, implementation, and consequences of decision making and public policies in multiple settings and at various levels.
u666 (x=108) • HS.C4.5
u667 (x=180) Use disciplinary and interdisciplinary lenses to understand the characteristics and causes of local, regional, and global problems, instances of such problems in multiple contexts, and challenges and opportunities faced by those trying to address these problems over time and place.
u668 (x=108) • HS.C4.6
u669 (x=180) Assess options for action to address local, regional, and global problems by engaging in self- reflection, strategy identification, and
=== page 51 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u672 complex causal reasoning.
u673 (x=108) • HS.C4.7
u674 (x=180) Apply a range of deliberative and democratic strategies and procedures to make decisions in the classroom, school, and out-of-school civic contexts.
u675 ECONOMICS
u676 A financially literate individual understands how to manage income, spending, and investment.
u677 (x=108) • HS.E1.1
u678 (x=180) Evaluate how and why people make choices to improve their economic well-being.
u679 (x=108) • HS.E1.2
u680 (x=180) Analyze the factors that influence how and why people make budgeting and saving choices.
u681 (x=108) • HS.E1.3
u682 (x=180) Evaluate the cost and benefits of using credit.
u683 (x=108) • HS.E1.4
u684 (x=180) Compare the cost and benefits of several types of investments.
u685 (x=108) • HS.E1.5
u686 (x=180) Evaluate the ways insurance may minimize personal financial risk.
u687 By applying economic reasoning, individuals seek to understand the decisions of people, groups, and societies.
u688 (x=108) • HS.E2.1
u689 (x=180) Explain how scarcity results in economic decisions and evaluate their impact on individuals, institutions, and societies.
u690 (x=108) • HS.E2.2
u691 (x=180) Analyze how incentives influence economic choices for individuals, institutions, and societies.
u692 (x=108) • HS.E2.3
u693 (x=180) Use cost-benefit analysis and/or marginal analysis to evaluate an economic issue.
u694 Individuals and institutions are interdependent within market systems.
u695 (x=108) • HS.E3.1
u696 (x=180) Explain how buyers and sellers interact to create markets and market structures.
u697 (x=108) • HS.E3.2
u698 (x=180) Evaluate how numerous factors and conditions influence market prices.
u699 (x=108) • HS.E3.3
u700 (x=180) Evaluate the role of government in regulating market places.
u701 (x=108) • HS.E3.4
u702 (x=180) Explain the distinct types of business organizations and analyze the role of innovation and entrepreneurship in a market economy.
u703 The domestic economy is shaped by interactions between government, institutions, and the private sector.
u704 (x=108) • HS.E4.1
u705 (x=180) Use economic data to analyze the health of a national economy.
u706 (x=108) • HS.E4.2
u707 (x=180) Evaluate the economic conditions that lead to fiscal and monetary policy choices and explain their impact on households and businesses.
u708 (x=108) • HS.E4.3
u709 (x=180) Explain the roles of institutions in a market economy.
u710 (x=108) • HS.E4.4
u711 (x=180) Explain the effect of advancements in technology and training on economic growth and standards of living.
u712 The interconnected global economy impacts all individuals and groups in significant and varied ways.
u713 (x=108) • HS.E5.1
u714 (x=180) Evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of global trade.
u715 (x=108) • HS.E5.2
u716 (x=180) Evaluate how interdependence impacts individuals, institutions, and societies.
u717 (x=108) • HS.E5.3
u718 (x=180) Explain why nations chose to trade and how it is regulated.
u719 (x=108) • HS.E5.4
u720 (x=180) Explain how national economies influence trade.
=== page 52 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u723 GEOGRAPHY
u724 The use of geographic representations and tools help individuals understand their world.
u725 (x=108) • HS.G1.1
u726 (x=180) Use geographic data to explain and analyze relationships between locations of place and regions. • Key tools and representations such as maps, remotely sensed and other images, tables, and graphs
u727 (x=108) • HS.G1.2
u728 (x=180) Use geospatial tools and related technologies to construct relevant geographic data to explain spatial patterns and relationships. • Key tools and representations such as Google Earth, story mapping, wayfaring apps, and other geospatial technologies
u729 Human-environment interactions are essential aspects of human life in all societies.
u730 (x=108) • HS.G2.1
u731 (x=180) Analyze interactions within and between human and physical systems.
u732 (x=108) • HS.G2.2
u733 (x=180) Evaluate how political and economic decisions throughout time have influenced cultural and environmental characteristics of various places and regions.
u734 (x=108) • HS.G2.3
u735 (x=180) Evaluate the impact of human settlement on the environment and culture of specific places and regions.
u736 (x=108) • HS.G2.4
u737 (x=180) Evaluate the use and sustainability of natural resources.
u738 Examining human population and movement helps individuals understand past, present, and future conditions on Earth’s surface.
u739 (x=108) • HS.G3.1
u740 (x=180) Analyze the reciprocal nature of how historical events and the diffusion of ideas, technologies, and cultural practices have influenced migration patterns and the distribution of human population.
u741 (x=108) • HS.G3.2
u742 (x=180) Evaluate the impact of economic activities and political decisions on spatial patterns within and among urban, suburban, and rural regions.
u743 (x=108) • HS.G3.3
u744 (x=180) Evaluate the influence of long-term climate variability on human migration and settlement patterns, resource use, and land uses at local-to-global scales.
u745 (x=108) • HS.G3.4
u746 (x=180) Evaluate the consequences of human-made and natural catastrophes on global trade, politics, and human migration settlement.
u747 (x=108) • HS.G3.5
u748 (x=180) Evaluate the impact of social, political, and economic decisions that have caused conflict or promoted cooperation throughout time.
u749 Global interconnections and spatial patterns are a necessary part of geographic reasoning.
u750 (x=108) • HS.G4.1
u751 (x=180) Take an active stance on a geographic issue reflecting its scale (local, regional, state, national, or global)
u752 (x=108) • HS.G4.2
u753 (x=180) Analyze patterns of global power and influence in respect to trade, demographics, politics, and resource availability and use.
u754 (x=108) • HS.G4.3
u755 (x=180) Analyze patterns of interdependence.
=== page 53 === [running header: Arizona History and Social Science Standards modified 8/23/19]
u758 HISTORY
u759 The development of civilizations, societies, cultures, and innovations have influenced history and continue to impact the modern world.
u760 (x=108) • HS.H1.1
u761 (x=180) Explain the process of state-building, expansion, and dissolution.
u762 (x=108) • HS.H1.2
u763 (x=180) Explain and compare how social, cultural, and environmental factors influenced state-building, expansion, and dissolution.
u764 (x=108) • HS.H1.3
u765 (x=180) Evaluate the consequences that resulted from civilizational and cultural interactions.
u766 (x=108) • HS.H1.4
u767 (x=180) Analyze the impact of cultural diffusion.
u768 (x=108) • HS.H1.5
u769 (x=180) Explain how religions and belief systems have affected the origins of societies.
u770 (x=108) • HS.H1.6
u771 (x=180) Analyze the relationship among different regional, social, ethnic, and racial groups and explain how these groups’ experiences have related to national identities.
u772 (x=108) • HS.H1.7
u773 (x=180) Analyze how technological innovation and trade has affected economic development and transformed societies.
u774 Cycles of conflict and cooperation have shaped relations among people, places, and environments.
u775 (x=108) • HS.H2.1
u776 (x=180) Explain multiple causes of conflict.
u777 (x=108) • HS.H2.2
u778 (x=180) Analyze approaches to conflict management and resolution.
u779 (x=108) • HS.H2.3
u780 (x=180) Evaluate the short- and long- term impacts of conflicts and their resolutions.
u781 (x=108) • HS.H2.4
u782 (x=180) Compare causes and effects of isolationism and globalism.
u783 Economic, political, and religious ideas and institutions have influenced history and continue to shape the modern world.
u784 (x=108) • HS.H3.1
u785 (x=180) Analyze how societies, leaders, institutions, and organizations respond to societal needs and changes.
u786 (x=108) • HS.H3.2
u787 (x=180) Analyze how ideologies, religion, and belief systems have influenced economic, political, and social institutions over time.
u788 (x=108) • HS.H3.3
u789 (x=180) Compare the ways in which economic philosophies influenced political, economic, and social developments.
u790 (x=108) • HS.H3.4
u791 (x=180) Evaluate how societies have balanced individual freedoms, responsibilities, and human dignity versus the common good.
u792 (x=180) Explain how different labor systems developed and affected societies over time.
u793 (x=108) • HS.H3.5
u794 Patterns of social and political interactions have shaped people, places, and events throughout history and continue to shape the modern world.
u795 (x=108) • HS.H4.1
u796 (x=180) Examine how historically marginalized groups have affected change on political and social institutions.
u797 (x=108) • HS.H4.2
u798 (x=180) Explain how artistic, philosophical, and scientific ideas have developed and shaped society and institutions.
u799 (x=108) • HS.H4.3
u800 (x=180) Examine how access to information and technology has been used to influence society.
u801 (x=108) • HS.H4.4
u802 (x=180) Examine how a diverse society can be a force for unity and/or disunity.
