=== page 1 === [running header: World Geography]
u2 Social Studies Academic Standards
u3 Revised 2022
u4 (x=36) Course/Unit Credit: 0.5 Course Number: 474600 Teacher Licensure: Please refer to the Course Code Management System (https://adedata.arkansas.gov/ccms/) for the most current licensure codes. Grades: 9-12 Prerequisites:
u5 (x=127) None
=== page 2 === [running header: World Geography | Academic Standards & Disciplinary Concepts | World Geography Academic Standards - Revised 2022 Arkansas Department ]
u8 [T1 R1 C1] Course Focus and Content In Grades K-6, students develop foundational geographic knowledge and skills. In Grade 5, students hone skills and understanding of cultural and physical geography as they examine the various regions of the world. World Geography in Grades 9-12 continues to deepen geographic reasoning, knowledge, and skills as students focus on spatial relationships, places, regions, and human systems. This course emphasizes the application of geographic thinking skills to students’ immediate world around them, including their local communities and cities. Students will use spatial and environmental perspectives and available geospatial technologies to analyze and interpret a variety of geographic representations, pictorial and graphic evidence, and data. This type of geographic inquiry helps students understand and appreciate their own place in the world and fosters curiosity about Earth’s wide diversity of environments and cultures. This course lends itself to students examining global issues through case studies of countries and regions. Through this course students will be able to recognize and understand spatial patterns and relationships.
u9 [T1 R2 C1] Integrating Standards and Selecting Content Topics The disciplinary strands, standards, components, and the Knowledge and Skill Performance Expectations (KPEs and SPEs) are meant to be taught in an integrated manner, not in isolation. For example, a student might be studying an historical event or person while also learning specific civics, economics, geography, and/or history standards. The KPEs and SPEs require conceptual understanding which can be applied to future learning and additional content that may not be listed in the standards. The goal of knowledge acquisition in K-12 is for students to build knowledge and have experiences with content topics connected to their communities, the state of Arkansas, the United States, and the world. A thematic continuum of learning is provided to clarify (Figure 1) the expansion of learning from community to state to the world.
u10 [T1 R2 C2] Figure 1
u11 [T1 R3 C1] Related Laws for Social Studies A.C.A. § 1-5-109. Prisoners of War Remembrance Day. A.C.A. § 1-5-112. POW/MIA Recognition Day. A.C.A. § 1-5-113. Native American Heritage Week. A.C.A. § 1-5-114. Juneteenth Independence Day. A.C.A. § 1-5-119. Sultana Disaster Remembrance Day. A.C.A. § 6-16-101. Celebrate Freedom Week. A.C.A. § 6-16-105. United States Flag. A.C.A. § 6-16-106. Arkansas Flag. A.C.A. § 6-16-107. Patriotic Observances Generally. A.C.A. § 6-16-108. Recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance. A.C.A. § 6-16-111. Morals, Manners, Patriotism, and Business and Professional Integrity. A.C.A. § 6-16-121. African-American History – Teaching materials. A.C.A. § 6-16-122. American Heritage. A.C.A. § 6-16-148. Foundation of certain social studies or history courses offered in grades seven through twelve. A.C.A. § 6-16-154. Holocaust Education. A.C.A. § 6-16-124. Arkansas History – Required Social Studies Course. A.C.A. § 6-17-703. Arkansas History Professional Development. Teacher Note: Not all state statutes apply to the current grade level content.
=== page 3 === [running header: World Geography | Academic Standards & Disciplinary Concepts | World Geography Academic Standards - Revised 2022 Arkansas Department ]
u16 Skills and Application Throughout the course, students will develop and apply geographic thinking skills as well as disciplinary literacy skills. Some of these skills include map reading, spatial thinking, analyzing data, comparing and contrasting, and researching. As students interact with primary and secondary sources and show their understanding in a variety of ways, including oral, visual, and written forms. Students must be able to select and evaluate sources of information, draw and build upon ideas, explore issues, examine data, and analyze issues from multiple perspectives. After this course, students will have foundational skills to use in their subsequent social studies courses. World Geography is required by the Standards for Accreditation. These standards do not meet the Grades 7-12 Arkansas History requirement as defined in Act 787 of 1997. Refer to the Arkansas History Academic Standards written for the course in Grades 7-8 or the Arkansas History Curriculum Framework for the course in Grades 9-12 to fulfill the one-semester Arkansas History requirement as defined in Act 787 of 1997.
u17 [T1 R1 C1] Primary and Secondary Sources and Disciplinary Literacy Standards The Disciplinary Literacy Standards for History/Social Studies guide students with the specific skills they need to engage with all social studies content. These reading and writing skills are separated by grade bands and include the use of primary and secondary sources, analysis of content from a variety of perspectives, and assessment of the credibility and accuracy of sources. Teachers should access the Disciplinary Literacy Standards Resource for History/Social Studies document through the Division of Elementary and Secondary Education website.
=== page 4 === [running header: World Geography | Academic Standards & Disciplinary Concepts | World Geography Academic Standards - Revised 2022 Arkansas Department ]
u22 The College, Career, and Civic Life C3 Framework for Social Studies State Standards The acquisition of content knowledge and skills is paramount in a robust social studies program rooted in inquiry. The chart below summarizes social studies practices in four Dimensions.
u23 ● Dimensions 1, 3, and 4 of the College, Career, and Civic Life C3 Framework for Social Studies State Standards. These practices should be addressed throughout Grades K-12, building as students acquire the skills. ● Dimension 2 Applying Disciplinary Concepts and Tools sets forth the conceptual content, and the alignment to this dimension is embedded in the KPEs and SPEs.
u24 (x=122) Dimension 1
u25 (x=368) Dimension 3
u26 (x=614) Dimension 4
u27 (x=48) Developing Questions and Planning Inquiries
u28 (x=306) Evaluating Sources and Using Evidence
u29 (x=550) Communicating Conclusions and Taking
u30 Informed Action
u31 (x=41) 1. Construct compelling questions that promote inquiry around key ideas and issues 2. Develop supporting questions that contribute to inquiry: identifying facts, concepts, and interpretations 3. Answer compelling and supporting questions using appropriate and available sources that consider multiple points of view
u32 (x=287) 4. Gather relevant information from multiple perspectives and a variety of sources; evaluate the credibility of the source by determining its relevance and intended use 5. Use evidence from multiple sources to answer compelling and supporting questions by developing arguments with claims, counterclaims, and explanations
u33 (x=533) 6. Construct arguments and explanations that convey ideas and perspectives to appropriate audiences using print, oral, and digital technologies 7. Critique the credibility, relevance, and use of evidence in arguments and explanations proposed by self and others 8. Use disciplinary lenses within the social sciences to understand local, regional, and global problems, propose solutions, or assess strategies and options for action while applying deliberative processes
u34 [T1 R1 C1] Dimension 21 Applying Disciplinary Concepts and Tools
u35 [T1 R2 C1] Civics
u36 [T1 R2 C2] Economics
u37 [T1 R2 C3] Geography
u38 [T1 R2 C4] History
u39 [T1 R2 C5] Social Sciences
u40 [T1 R3 C1] ● Civic and Political Institutions ● Participation and Deliberation ● Processes, Rules, and Laws
u41 [T1 R3 C2] ● Economic Decision-Making ● Exchange and Markets ● Growth and Stability ● The National Economy ● The Global Economy
u42 [T1 R3 C3] ● Geographic Representations: Spatial Views of the World ● Human-Environment Interaction: Place, Regions, and Culture ● Human Populations: Spatial Patterns and Movements ● Global Interconnections: Global Spatial Patterns
u43 [T1 R3 C4] ● Change, Continuity, and Context ● Perspectives ● Historical Sources and Evidence ● Causation and Argumentation
u44 [T1 R3 C5] ● Psychology ● Sociology
u45 1 Organizational structure of the Social Studies Academic Standards is based on disciplinary strands in the C3 Framework.
=== page 5 === [running header: World Geography | Academic Standards & Disciplinary Concepts | World Geography Academic Standards - Revised 2022 Arkansas Department ]
u50 [T1 R1 C1] K-12 Disciplinary Standards Overview
u51 [T1 R2 C1] Civics
u52 [T1 R2 C2] Economics
u53 [T1 R2 C3] Geography
u54 [T1 R2 C4] History
u55 [T1 R3 C1] C.1 Students will understand the impact of origins, structures, and functions of institutions and laws on society and citizens. This includes personal civic rights, roles, responsibilities, and processes by which laws are made and amended. C.2 Students will understand the structure and functions of various types of government and how they exercise their powers. C.3 Students will understand the role of citizens in society, the ways the government protects the rights of citizens, the electoral process, and the role of political parties. C.4 Students will understand the process of making and changing laws and the ways institutions work together in carrying out the laws. C.5 Students will understand the impact of origins, structures, and functions of institutions and laws on society and Indigenous peoples. This includes the relationship of the Native nations and the United States during various time periods. C.6 Students will understand the structure and functions of various types of tribal government and how they exercise their powers. This includes the progress and challenges of present-day Native America.
u56 [T1 R3 C2] E.1 Students will understand the impact of economic decision-making. This includes the exchange of goods and services; role of producers, consumers, and government in the marketplace; and growth, stability, and interdependence within a global economy. E.2 Students will understand the impact of economic decision-making. This includes considering the marginal costs and benefits of alternatives. E.3 Students will understand the exchange of goods and services. This includes different allocation methods and changes in supply and demand; the role of producers, consumers, and government in a market economy; and the degree of competition among buyers and sellers in markets. E.4 Students will understand the growth, stability, and interdependence within a national economy. This includes the current and future state of the economy using economic indicators and monetary and fiscal policies for a variety of economic conditions. E.5 Students will understand the growth, stability, and interdependence within a global economy. This includes ways in which trade leads to increased economic interdependence. E.6 Students will understand the factors affecting income, wealth, and financial risk. This includes the role of credit in personal finance.
u57 [T1 R3 C3] G.1 Students will understand the purpose of geographic tools (e.g., maps, globes, charts, graphs) to understand, analyze, and explain human interaction with each other and with the environment. This includes the spatial characteristics and patterns of human settlement and connections between global regions. G.2 Students will understand the purpose of geographic tools (e.g., maps, globes, charts, graphs) to interpret spatial information. This includes spatial organization of people, cultures, places, and environments within various regions and geographic skills to interpret the past, present, and plan for the future. G.3 Students will understand the characteristics of different physical and cultural regions and how they change over time (through demographic changes, migration, settlement, and conflict). This includes the impact physical geography has on human systems, including politics, culture, economics, and use of resources and how a region or culture interacts with itself, the environment, and other regions and cultures. G.4 Students will understand the impact humans have on the environment. This includes the distribution, management, and consumption of resources. G.5 Students will understand the impact Indigenous peoples have on the environment. This includes the communal view of how Indigenous peoples utilized the land and resources; and the characteristics of the original Indigenous peoples of Arkansas by analyzing artifacts, artwork, and other sources.
u58 [T1 R3 C4] H.1 Students will understand chronology, patterns of continuity, and change over time. This includes the contextualization of historical events and ways people gather, view, construct, and interpret historical evidence. H.2 Students will understand key historical periods from the beginning of civilization (World Era 1) through 1500 C.E. (World Era 5). This includes the patterns of social, economic, and political change over time and the ways people view, construct, and interpret the history of nations and cultures of the world. H.3 Students will understand key historical periods from the United States' Beginnings (Era 1) through 1850 (Era 4). This includes the patterns of social, economic, and political change over time and the ways people view, construct, and interpret the history of the United States. H.4 Students will understand key historical periods from Civil War and Reconstruction (Era 5) to the Emergence of Modern America, 1890-1930 (Era 7). This includes the patterns of social, economic, and political change over time and the ways people view, construct, and interpret the history of the United States. H.5 Students will understand key historical periods from the Great Depression and World War II, 1929-1945 (Era 8), to the Contemporary United States, 1968 to Present (Era 10). This includes the patterns of social, economic, and political change over time and the ways people view, construct, and interpret the history of the United States. H.6 Students will understand key historical periods from the Emergence of the First Global Age, 1450-1770 (World Era 6), to the Twentieth Century Since 1945 (World Era 9). This includes the patterns of social, economic, and political change over time and the ways people view, construct, and interpret the history of nations and cultures of the world.
=== page 6 === [running header: World Geography | Academic Standards & Disciplinary Concepts | World Geography Academic Standards - Revised 2022 Arkansas Department ]
u63 Disciplinary Standards At a Glance
u64 [T1 R1 C1] Disciplinary Strand
u65 [T1 R1 C2] Disciplinary Standard
u66 [T1 R2 C1] Disciplinary Component
u67 [T1 R2 C2] ● Grade or Course Specific Components
u68 [T2 R1 C1] Geography
u69 [T2 R1 C2] G.2 Students will understand the purpose of geographic tools (e.g., maps, globes, charts, graphs) to interpret spatial information. This includes the spatial organization of people, cultures, places, and environments within various regions, and geographic skills to interpret the past, the present, and plan for the future.
u70 [T2 R2 C1] World in Spatial Terms
u71 [T2 R2 C2] ● Spatial data to construct maps and other geographic representations using geographic tools and geospatial technologies ● Spatial organization of people, cultures, places, and environments on the Earth’s surface
u72 [T3 R1 C1] Geography
u73 [T3 R1 C2] G.2 Students will understand the purpose of geographic tools (e.g., maps, globes, charts, graphs) to interpret spatial information. This includes the spatial organization of people, cultures, places, and environments within various regions and geographic skills to interpret the past, the present, and plan for the future.
u74 [T3 R2 C1] Places and Regions
u75 [T3 R2 C2] ● Characteristics that make up a region and predict the impact physical and cultural influences will have on that region in the future
u76 [T4 R1 C1] Geography
u77 [T4 R1 C2] G.3 Students will understand the characteristics of different physical and cultural regions and how they change over time (through demographic changes, migration, settlement, and conflict). This includes the impact physical geography has on human systems, including politics, culture, economics, and use of resources and how a region or culture interacts with itself, the environment, and other regions and cultures.
u78 [T4 R2 C1] Human Systems
u79 [T4 R2 C2] ● Complex cultural and physical characteristics, distribution, and migration of human population and settlement on the Earth’s surface ● Patterns and networks of economic interdependence among physical and cultural regions; future patterns based on current phenomena
u80 [T5 R1 C1] Geography
u81 [T5 R1 C2] G.4 Students will understand the impact humans have on the environment. This includes the distribution, management, and consumption of resources.
u82 [T5 R2 C1] Environment and Society
u83 [T5 R2 C2] ● Human Impact on the Environment
=== page 7 === [running header: World Geography | Academic Standards & Disciplinary Concepts | Knowledge and Skill Performance Expectations | World Geography Academic Standards - Revised 2022 Arkansas Department ]
u88 [T1 R1 C1] Disciplinary Note
u89 [T1 R2 C1] The major work of the World Geography course includes the disciplinary strands of Civics, Economics, Geography, and History. Each disciplinary strand is meant to be taught in an integrated manner, not in isolation. Teacher Note: Concepts of the Civics, Economic, and History strands are implicitly addressed in the embedded KPEs and SPEs.
u90 [T1 R3 C1] Civics
u91 [T1 R3 C2] Economics
u92 [T1 R3 C3] History
u93 [T1 R4 C1] ●Civic and Political Institutions ●Participation and Deliberation ●Processes, Rules, and Laws
u94 [T1 R4 C2] ●Economic Decision-Making ●Exchange and Markets ●Growth and Stability ●The National Economy ●The Global Economy
u95 [T1 R4 C3] ●Change, Continuity, and Context ●Perspectives ●Historical Sources and Evidence ●Causation and Argumentation
u96 Geography - World in Spatial Terms
u97 G.2 Students will understand the purpose of geographic tools (e.g., maps, globes, charts, graphs) to interpret spatial information. This includes the spatial organization of people, cultures, places, and environments within various regions and geographic skills to interpret the past, the present, and plan for the future.
u98 ● Spatial data to construct maps and other geographic representations using geographic tools and geospatial technologies ● Spatial organization of people, cultures, places, and environments on the Earth’s surface
u101 G.2.WG.1 Investigate political, cultural, and economic relationships between places and regions using geographic representations and geospatial technologies.
u102 G.2.WG.2 Solve geographic problems created by physical characteristics of places and regions using multiple geographic representations and geospatial technologies.
u103 G.2.WG.3 Analyze various forms of maps that illustrate multiple points of view.
u104 G.2.WG.4 Create geographic representations to illustrate demographic information using data collected from a variety of sources.
u105 G.2.WG.5 Analyze the spatial organization of people, places, and environments using location, distance, direction, scale, movement, region, and density.
u106 G.2.WG.6
=== page 8 === [running header: World Geography | Academic Standards & Disciplinary Concepts | Knowledge and Skill Performance Expectations | World Geography Academic Standards - Revised 2022 Arkansas Department ]
u111 Research the impact of interdependence and accessibility among people, places, and environments.
u112 G.2.WG.7 Use spatial data to answer student-generated questions about the relationships between spatial organization of people and places, people and environment, and places and environments.
u113 Geography - Places and Regions
u114 G.2 Students will understand the purpose of geographic tools (e.g., maps, globes, charts, graphs) to interpret spatial information. This includes the spatial organization of people, cultures, places, and environments within various regions and geographic skills to interpret the past, the present, and plan for the future.
u115 ● Characteristics that make up a region and predict the impact physical and cultural influences will have on that region in the future
u118 G.2.WG.8 Analyze the impact of physical characteristics and human influences on the creation of various regions by examining spatial patterns, geographic representations, and available geospatial technologies.
u119 G.2.WG.9 Compare the changes over time on the boundaries and characteristics of regions caused by various factors using geographic representations and data (e.g., climate, technology, migration, conflict, government).
u120 G.2.WG.10 Analyze the impact of cultural and social factors on individuals’ varying perceptions of places and regions created by physical characteristics and human influences.
u121 G.2.WG.11 Use the physical and cultural characteristics of regions to justify the creation of a new region based on current trends and data.
=== page 9 === [running header: World Geography | Academic Standards & Disciplinary Concepts | Knowledge and Skill Performance Expectations | World Geography Academic Standards - Revised 2022 Arkansas Department ]
u126 Geography - Human Systems
u127 G.3 Students will understand the characteristics of different physical and cultural regions and how they change over time (through demographic changes, migration, settlement, and conflict). This includes the impact physical geography has on human systems, including politics, culture, economics, and use of resources and how a region or culture interacts with itself, the environment, and other regions and cultures.
u128 ● Complex cultural and physical characteristics, distribution, and migration of human population and settlement on the Earth’s surface ● Patterns and networks of economic interdependence among physical and cultural regions; future patterns based on current phenomena
u131 G.3.WG.1 Use demographic data to characterize the populations of various places and reasons for the changes over time (e.g., birth rates, death rates, gender, Holocaust, age, race, ethnicity).
u132 G.3.WG.2 Analyze the effects of various influences on population distribution and migration on society (e.g., history, migration, physical environment, economy, politics, technology, climate, land use, resources).
u133 G.3.WG.3 Analyze various push-and pull factors that lead to migration and changes in these factors over time.
u134 G.3.WG.4 Analyze a variety of factors that create cultural regions and affect spatial patterns and movements of various cultures (e.g., attitudes, beliefs, languages, ethnicity, gender).
u135 G.3.WG.5 Examine varying attitudes among different cultures toward the uses of natural and human resources.
u136 G.3.WG.6 Evaluate societal changes resulting from cultural diffusion and cultural convergence.
u137 G.3.WG.7 Analyze changes in the environment and cultural characteristics of a place or region that influence spatial patterns of trade and land use over time.
u138 G.3.WG.8 Evaluate the benefits of various locations in terms of natural, human, and capital resources.
u139 G.3.WG.9
=== page 10 === [running header: World Geography | Academic Standards & Disciplinary Concepts | Knowledge and Skill Performance Expectations | World Geography Academic Standards - Revised 2022 Arkansas Department ]
u144 Evaluate how economic globalization and the expanding use of scarce resources contribute to conflict and cooperation within and among countries.
u145 G.3.WG.10 Examine the diffusion of a phenomenon and its impact on various regions of contact (e.g., spread of infectious disease, invasive plants, invasive animals).
u146 Geography - Environment and Society
u147 G.4 Students will understand the impact humans have on the environment. This includes the distribution, management, and consumption of resources.
u148 ● Human Impact on the Environment
u151 G.4.WG.1 Analyze effects of changes made by humans on the physical environment (e.g., industrialization, agricultural, rural land use, urban land use, mining, forestry).
u152 G.4.WG.2 Analyze ways people have used technology to adapt to and modify the physical environment.
u153 G.4.WG.3 Research consequences of human-made and natural catastrophes on global trade, politics, and human migration using a variety of primary and secondary sources.
